This chapter provides a historical background to the field of glycobiology and
an overview of this book. General terms found in the volume are considered,
common monosaccharide units of glycoconjugates mentioned, and a uniform symbol
nomenclature used for structural depictions presented. The major glycan
classes discussed in the book are described, and an overview of the general
pathways for their biosynthesis is provided. Topological issues relevant to
biosynthesis and functions of glycoconjugates are also considered, and the
growing role of these molecules in medicine, biotechnology, nanotechnology,
bioenergy, and materials science is mentioned.

Defined in the broadest sense, glycobiology is the study of the structure,
biosynthesis, biology, and evolution of saccharides (also called
carbohydrates, sugar chains, or glycans) that are widely distributed in nature
and of the proteins that recognize them. How does glycobiology fit into the
modern concepts of molecular biology? The central paradigm driving research in
molecular biology has been that biological information flows from DNA to RNA
to protein. The power of this concept lies in its template-based precision,
the ability to manipulate one class of molecules based on knowledge of
another, and the patterns of sequence homology and relatedness that predict
function and reveal evolutionary relationships. With ongoing sequencing of
numerous genomes, spectacular gains in understanding the biology of nucleic
acids and proteins have occurred. Thus, many scientists assume that studying
just these molecules will explain the makeup of cells, tissues, organs,
physiological systems, and intact organisms. In fact, making a cell requires
many small molecule metabolites as well as two other major classes of
macromolecules—lipids and carbohydrates—which serve as intermediates in
generating energy and as signaling effectors, recognition markers, and
structural components. Taken together with the fact that they encompass some
of the major posttranslational modifications of proteins, lipids and
carbohydrates help explain how the relatively small number of genes in the
typical genome can generate the enormous biological complexities inherent in
the development, growth, and functioning of diverse organisms.

The biological roles of carbohydrates are particularly prominent in the
assembly of complex multicellular organs and organisms, which requires
interactions between cells and the surrounding matrix. Without any known
exception, all cells and numerous macromolecules in nature carry an array of
covalently attached sugars (monosaccharides) or sugar chains
(oligosaccharides), which are generically referred to in this book as
“glycans.” Sometimes glycans can also be freestanding entities. Being on the
outer surface of cellular and secreted macromolecules, many glycans are in a
position to modulate or mediate a variety of events in cell–cell, cell–matrix,
and cell–molecule interactions critical to the development and function of a
complex multicellular organism. They can also mediate interactions between
organisms (e.g., between host and a parasite, pathogen, or a symbiont). In
addition, simple, rapidly turning over, protein-bound glycans are abundant
within the nucleus and cytoplasm, where they can serve as regulatory switches.
A more complete paradigm of molecular biology must therefore include glycans,
often in covalent combination with other macromolecules (i.e.,
glycoconjugates, such as glycoproteins and glycolipids). In analogy to the
current situation in Cosmology, glycans can be considered as the “dark matter”
of the biological universe: a major and critical component that has yet to be
fully incorporated into the “standard model” of biology.

The chemistry and metabolism of carbohydrates were prominent matters of
interest in the first part of the 20th century. Although engendering much
attention, they were primarily considered as a source of energy or as
structural materials, apparently lacking other biological activities.
Furthermore, during the molecular biology revolution of the 1970s, studies of
glycans lagged far behind those of other major classes of molecules. This was
in part because of their inherent structural complexity, the difficulty in
determining their sequences, and the fact that their biosynthesis could not be
directly predicted from a DNA template. The development of many new
technologies for exploring the structures and functions of glycans has since
opened a new frontier of molecular biology called “glycobiology”—a word first
coined in the late 1980s to recognize the coming together of the traditional
disciplines of carbohydrate chemistry and biochemistry with a modern
understanding of the cell and molecular biology of glycans and, in particular,
their conjugates with proteins and lipids.
[Glycobiology](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycobiology/) is now one of the
more rapidly growing fields in the natural sciences, with broad relevance to
many areas of basic research, biomedicine, and biotechnology. The field
includes the chemistry of carbohydrates, the enzymology of glycan formation
and degradation, the recognition of glycans by specific proteins, roles of
glycans in complex biological systems, and their analysis or manipulation by
various techniques. Research in glycobiology thus requires a foundation not
only in the nomenclature, biosynthesis, structure, chemical synthesis, and
functions of glycans but also in the general disciplines of molecular
genetics, protein chemistry, cell biology, developmental biology, physiology,
and medicine. This book provides an overview of the field, with relative
emphasis on the glycans of animal systems. It is assumed that the reader has a
basic background in advanced undergraduate-level chemistry, biochemistry, and
cell biology. Some of the major investigators who influenced the early
development of Glycobiology are shown in [Figure
1.1](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f1/?report=objectonly), and more are listed
in [Online Appendix 1A](/books/n/glyco3/app_discoveries/). Many others have
made major contributions as well, and a summary of the general principles
gained from all this research is presented in [Table
1.1](/books/NBK316258/table/CH1TB1/?report=objectonly).

Carbohydrates are defined as polyhydroxyaldehydes, polyhydroxyketones and
their simple derivatives, or larger compounds that can be hydrolyzed into such
units. A monosaccharide is a carbohydrate that usually cannot be hydrolyzed
into a simpler form. It has a potential carbonyl group at the end of the
carbon chain (an aldehyde group) or at an inner carbon (a ketone group). These
two types of monosaccharides are therefore named aldoses and ketoses,
respectively (for examples, see below, and for more details, see [Chapter
2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)). Free monosaccharides can exist in open-chain or
ring forms ([Figure 1.2](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f2/?report=objectonly)).
Ring forms of the monosaccharides are the rule in oligosaccharides, which are
linear or branched chains of monosaccharides attached to one another via
glycosidic linkages (the term “polysaccharide” is typically used for large
glycans composed of repeating oligosaccharide motifs; for examples, see
[Chapter 3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/)). The ring form of a monosaccharide
generates a chiral anomeric center at C-1 for aldo sugars or at C-2 for keto
sugars (for details, see [Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)). A glycosidic
linkage involves the attachment of a monosaccharide to another residue,
typically via the hydroxyl group of this anomeric center, generating
α-linkages or β-linkages that are defined based on the relationship of the
glycosidic oxygen to the anomeric carbon and ring ([Chapter
2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)). These two linkage types confer very different
structural properties and biological functions on sequences that are otherwise
identical in composition, as classically illustrated by the differences
between starch and cellulose (both are homopolymers of glucose, the former
largely α1-4-linked and the latter β1-4-linked throughout). A glycoconjugate
is a compound in which one or more monosaccharide or oligosaccharide units
(the glycone) are covalently linked to a noncarbohydrate moiety (the
aglycone). An oligosaccharide that is not attached to an aglycone possesses
the reducing power of the aldehyde or ketone in its terminal monosaccharide
component, with the exception of oligosaccharides in which the sugars are
linked together at their reducing ends, as in derivatives of sucrose or
trehalose. The end of a glycan exposing the aldehyde or ketone group is
therefore named the reducing terminus or reducing end, terms that tend to be
used even when the sugar chain is attached to an aglycone and has thus lost
its reducing power. Correspondingly, the opposite end of the chain tends to be
called the nonreducing end (note the analogy to the amino and carboxyl ends of
proteins, or the 5′ and 3′ ends of DNA and RNA).

In naturally occurring glycoconjugates, the portion of the molecule comprising
the glycans can vary greatly in contribution to its overall size. In many
cases, the glycans comprise a substantial portion of the mass of
glycoconjugates (for a typical example, see [Figure
1.3](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f3/?report=objectonly)). For this reason, the
surfaces of all types of cells in nature (which are heavily decorated with
different kinds of glycoconjugates) are effectively covered with a dense array
of sugars, the so-called “glycocalyx.” This cell-surface structure was first
observed many years ago by electron microscopists as a polysaccharide coat
external to the cell surface membrane in bacteria, which could be stained with
ruthenium red, and in animal cells, where the the anionic polysaccharides on
the surface could be decorated with polycationic reagents such as cationized
ferritin (for classic and recent examples, see [Figure
1.4](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f4/?report=objectonly)). The density of
glycans in the glycocalyx can be remarkably high. For example, it has been
calculated that the concentration of sialic acids in the glycocalyx of a
typical human B lymphocyte may be >100 mm.

Nucleotides and proteins are linear polymers that can each contain only one
basic type of linkage between monomers. In contrast, each monosaccharide can
theoretically generate either an α- or a β-linkage to any one of several
positions on another monosaccharide in a chain or to another type of molecule.
Thus, while three different nucleotides or amino acids can only generate six
trimers, three different hexoses could theoretically produce (depending on
which of their forms are considered) anywhere from 1056 to 27,648 unique
trisaccharides. This difference in complexity becomes even greater as the
number of monosaccharide units found in natural glycan increases (now
numbering in the hundreds). Fortunately for the student of glycobiology,
naturally occurring biological macromolecules in a given species tend to
contain relatively few of the possible monosaccharide units, and they are in a
limited number of combinations. Of course, the great majority of glycans in
most species have yet to be discovered and structurally defined. Thus, much of
the possible diversity may yet exist in nature.

Although several hundred distinct monosaccharides are known in nature, only a
minority of these are commonly found in well-studied glycans. Examples of
common monosaccharides in vertebrate cells are listed below, along with their
standard abbreviations (for details regarding their structures, see [Chapter
2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/), and embedded links from the symbols in [Online
Appendix 1B](/books/n/glyco3/symbolnomenclature/)).

  * _Pentoses_ : five-carbon neutral sugars—D-xylose (Xyl)

  *  _Hexoses_ : six-carbon neutral sugars—for example, D-glucose (Glc)

  *  _Hexosamines_ : hexoses with an amino group at the 2-position, which can be either free or, more commonly, N-acetylated—for example, _N_ -acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc)

  *  _6-Deoxyhexoses_ : for example, L-fucose (Fuc)

  *  _Uronic acids_ : hexoses with a carboxylate at the 6-position—for example, D-glucuronic acid (GlcA)

  *  _Nonulosonic acids_ : family of nine-carbon acidic sugars, of which the most common in animals is the sialic acid _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac, also sometimes called NeuAc or, historically, NANA) (see [Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/))

For simplicity, the symbols D- and L- are omitted from the full names of
common monosaccharides from here on unless a less common variant occurs. This
limited set of monosaccharides dominates the glycobiology of more recently
evolved (so-called “higher”) animals, but several others have been found in
“lower” animals (e.g., tyvelose; [Chapters 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/) and
[26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)), bacteria and archea (e.g., keto-deoxyoctulosonic
acid, rhamnose, L-arabinose, and muramic acid; [Chapters
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)), and plants (e.g.,
arabinose, apiose, and galacturonic acid; [Chapter
24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). A variety of modifications of glycans further
enhance their diversity in nature and often serve to mediate specific
biological functions. Thus, the hydroxyl groups of different monosaccharides
can be subject to modifications such as phosphorylation, sulfation,
methylation, O-acetylation, or fatty acylation. Although amino groups are
commonly N-acetylated, they can be N-sulfated or remain unsubstituted.
Carboxyl groups are occasionally subject to lactonization to nearby hydroxyl
groups or even lactamization to nearby amino groups.

Details regarding the structural depiction of monosaccharides, linkages, and
oligosaccharides are discussed in [Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/). Many
figures in this volume use a symbolic depiction of sugar chains (see [Online
Appendix 1B](/books/n/glyco3/symbolnomenclature/) and examples in [Figure
1.5](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f5/?report=objectonly)). This Symbol
Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG) is expanded from the Second Edition and has
been vetted and adopted by many investigators. For reader convenience, a full
table of symbols is reproduced on the inside cover of the book, is available
for view at the NCBI Books website [Online Appendix
1B](/books/n/glyco3/symbolnomenclature/), and can be downloaded in drawing and
text formats from this website. Detailed notes regarding the logic used for
the symbol nomenclature can also be found at the [Online Appendix
1B](/books/n/glyco3/symbolnomenclature/), along with embedded links to online
databases featuring details about each monosaccharide, as well as color
settings information for artists who wish to use the system.

The common classes of glycans are primarily defined according to the nature of
the linkage to the aglycone (protein or lipid) (for common eukaryotic examples
see [Figures 1.6](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f6/?report=objectonly) and
[1.7](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f7/?report=objectonly)). A glycoprotein is a
glycoconjugate in which a protein carries one or more glycans covalently
attached to a polypeptide backbone, usually via N- or O-linkages. An N-glycan
(N-linked oligosaccharide, N-[Asn]-linked oligosaccharide) is a sugar chain
covalently linked to an asparagine residue of a polypeptide chain, commonly
involving a GlcNAc residue in eukaryoates, and the consensus peptide sequence:
Asn-X-Ser/Thr. Animal N-glycans also share a common pentasaccharide core
region and can be generally divided into three main classes: oligomannose (or
high-mannose) type, complex type, and hybrid type ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). An O-glycan (O-linked oligosaccharide) is
frequently linked to the polypeptide via _N-_ acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to
a hydroxyl group of a serine or threonine residue and can be extended into
different structural core classes ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). A
mucin is a large glycoprotein that carries many O-glycans that are clustered
(closely spaced). Several other types of O-glycans also exist (e.g., O-linked
fucose, glucose, or mannose). A proteoglycan is a glycoconjugate that has one
or more glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains (see definition below) attached to a
“core protein” through a typical core region that has at its reducing end a
xylose residue linked to the hydroxyl group of a serine residue. The
distinction between a proteoglycan and a glycoprotein is otherwise arbitrary,
because some proteoglycan polypeptides can carry both GAG chains and different
O- and N-glycans ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Many cytoplasmic and
nuclear proteins have single GlcNAc residue on one or more of their serine or
threonine residues ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). [Figure
1.7](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f7/?report=objectonly) provides a listing of
known glycan–protein linkages in nature.

A glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor is a glycan bridge between
phosphatidylinositol and a phosphoethanolamine that is in amide linkage to the
carboxyl terminus of a protein. This structure typically constitutes the only
anchor to the lipid bilayer membrane for such proteins ([Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). A glycosphingolipid (often named a glycolipid)
consists of a glycan usually attached via glucose or galactose to the terminal
primary hydroxyl group of the lipid moiety ceramide, which is composed of a
long chain base (sphingosine) and a fatty acid ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Glycolipids can be neutral or anionic. A
ganglioside is an anionic glycolipid containing one or more residues of sialic
acid. It should be noted that these represent only the most common classes of
glycans reported in eukaryotic cells. There are several other less studied
glycan types found on one or the other side of the cell membrane in animal
cells ([Chapters 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/), [17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/), and
[18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/)) and many others in plants, algae, and
prokaryotes.

Although different glycan classes have unique core regions by which they are
distinguished, certain outer structural sequences are often shared among
different classes of glycans. For example, animal N- and O-glycans and
glycosphingolipids frequently carry the subterminal disaccharide
Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-([ _N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) or LacNAc) or, less commonly,
GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-(LacdiNAc) units. The LacNAc units can sometimes be
repeated, giving extended poly- _N-_ acetyllactosamines (sometimes incorrectly
called “poly-lactosamines”) ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Less
commonly, the LacdiNAc motif can also be repeated (termed polyLacdiNAc). Outer
LacNAc units can be modified by fucosylation or by branching and are typically
capped in vertebrates by sialic acids or, less commonly, by sulfate esters,
Fuc, α-Gal, β-GalNAc, or β-GlcA units ([Chapters 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)
and [15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). In contrast, eukaryotic glycosaminoglycans
are linear copolymers of acidic disaccharide repeating units, each typically
containing a hexosamine (GlcN or GalN) and a hexose (Gal) or hexuronic acid
(GlcA or IdoA) ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). The type of disaccharide
unit defines the glycosaminoglycan as chondroitin or dermatan sulfate
(GalNAcβ1-4GlcA/IdoA), heparin or heparan sulfate (GlcNAcα1-4GlcA/IdoA), or
keratan sulfate (Galβ1-4GlcNAc). [Keratan sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/keratansulfate/) is actually a 6-O-sulfated form of poly- _N_
-acetyllactosamine attached to an N- or O-glycan core, rather than to a
typical Xyl-Ser-containing proteoglycan linkage region. Another type of
glycosaminoglycan, hyaluronan (a polymer of GlcNAcβ1-4GlcA), appears to exist
primarily as a free glycan unattached to any aglycone ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). Some glycosaminoglycans have sulfate esters
substituting either amino or hydroyxl groups (i.e., N- or O-sulfate groups).
Another anionic polysaccharide that can be extended from LacNAc units is
polysialic acid, a homopolymer of sialic acid that is selectively expressed
only on a few proteins in vertebrates. Polysialic acids and hyaluronan are
also found as the capsular polysaccharides of certain pathogenic bacteria
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). For simplicity, this section has
focused primarily on vertebrate glycans. Many other classes of glycans exist
in other branches of the tree of life ([Chapters
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)–[26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)).

Unlike protein sequences, which are primary gene products, glycan structures
are not encoded directly in the genome and are secondary gene products. A few
percent of known genes in the human genome are dedicated to producing the
enzymes and transporters responsible for the biosynthesis and assembly of
glycans ([Chapter 8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)), typically as posttranslational
modifications of proteins or by glycosylation of core lipids. The glycans
themselves represent numerous combinatorial possibilities, generated by a
variety of competing and sequentially acting glycosidases and
glycosyltransferases ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)) and the
subcompartmentalized “assembly-line” mechanisms of glycan biosynthesis in the
Golgi apparatus of eukaryotes ([Chapter 4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)). Thus, even
with full knowledge of the expression levels of all relevant gene products,
one cannot accurately predict the precise structures of glycans elaborated by
a given cell type. Furthermore, small changes in environmental cues can cause
dramatic changes in glycans produced by a given cell. It is this variable and
dynamic nature of glycosylation that makes it a powerful way to generate and
modulate biological diversity and complexity. Of course, it also makes glycans
more difficult to study than nucleic acids and proteins.

One of the most fascinating and yet frustrating aspects of protein
glycosylation is the phenomenon of microheterogeneity. Thus, at any particular
glycan attachment site on a given protein synthesized by a particular cell
type, a range of variations might be found in the structures of the attached
glycan (and in some instances, the glycan may be missing). Effectively, a
given polypeptide encoded by a single gene can exist in numerous “glycoforms,”
each constituting a distinct molecular species. For some glycoproteins the
microheterogeneity at a particular site may be quite limited, whereas for
other sites it may be extensive, even within the same glycoprotein species.
Mechanistically, microheterogeneity might be generated by the rapidity with
which multiple, sequential, partially competitive glycosylation and
deglycosylation reactions take place in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
Golgi apparatus, through which a newly synthesized glycoprotein passes, along
with the lack of a template for directing the synthesis and the accessibility
of glycans at a site to the modifying enzymes ([Chapter
4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)). An alternate possibility is that each individual
cell or cell type is in fact exquisitely specific in the glycosylation it
produces, but that intercellular variations result in the observed
microheterogeneity of samples from natural multicellular sources. Whatever the
origin of microheterogeneity, it explains the anomalous behavior of
glycoproteins in analytical/separation techniques and makes complete
structural analysis of a glycoprotein a difficult task. From a functional
point of view, the biological significance of microheterogeneity remains
unclear. It is possible that this is a type of diversity generator, intended
for diversifying endogenous recognition functions and/or for evading microbes
and parasites, each of which can bind with high specificity only to certain
glycan structures ([Chapters 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/) and
[42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).

Most well-characterized pathways for the biosynthesis of major classes of
eukaryotic glycans are within ER and Golgi compartments ([Chapter
4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)). Newly synthesized proteins originating in the ER
are either cotranslationally or posttranslationally modified with glycans at
various stages in their itinerary toward their final destinations. N-glycans
are partially assembled on lipid donors on the cytoplasmic face of the ER and
then flipped across the membrane where the oligosaccharide assembly is
completed and transfer to the nascent protein occurs. This oligosaccharide is
then trimmed and extended by the addition of one monosaccharide at a time as
the protein passes through the ER and the Golgi. These glycosylation reactions
use activated forms of monosaccharides (nucleotide sugars; [Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)) as donors for reactions that are catalyzed by
glycosyltransferases (for details about their biochemistry, molecular
genetics, and cell biology, see [Chapters 4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/),
[6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/), and [8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)). The nucleotide
sugar donors are synthesized within the cytosolic or nuclear compartment from
monosaccharide precursors of endogenous or exogenous origin and then actively
transported across a membrane bilayer into the lumen of the ER and Golgi
compartments ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). Notably, the portion of the
glycoconjugate that faces the inside of these compartments will ultimately
face the outside of the cell or the inside of a secretory granule or lysosome
and will be topologically unexposed to the cytosol. The biosynthetic enzymes
(glycosyltransferases, sulfotransferases, etc.) responsible for catalyzing
these reactions are well studied ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)), and
their location has helped to define various functional compartments of the
ER–Golgi pathway. A classical model envisioned that these enzymes are
physically lined up along this pathway in the precise sequence in which they
actually work. This model appears to be oversimplified, as there is
considerable overlap in the distribution of these enzymes, and the actual
distribution of a given enzyme depends on the cell type.

All topological considerations mentioned above are reversed with regard to
nuclear and cytoplasmic glycosylation, because the active sites of the
relevant glycosyltransferases face the cytosol, which is in direct
communication with the interior of the nucleus. Until the mid-1980s, the
accepted dogma was that glycoconjugates occurred exclusively on the outer
surface of cells, on the internal (luminal) surface of intracellular
organelles, and on secreted molecules. The cytosol and nucleus were assumed to
be devoid of glycosylation capacity. However, it is now clear that certain
distinct types of glycoconjugates are synthesized and reside within the
cytosol and nucleus ([Chapter 18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/)). Indeed, one of
them, named O-GlcNAc ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)), may well be
numerically the most common type of glycoconjugate in many cell types. The
fact that this major form of glycosylation was missed by so many investigators
for so long serves to emphasize the relatively unexplored state of the field
of glycobiology.

Like all components of living cells, glycans are constantly being turned over
by degradation and the enzymes that catalyze this process cleave glycans
either at the outer (nonreducing) terminus (exoglycosidases) or internally
(endoglycosidases) ([Chapters 4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/) and
[44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). Some terminal monosaccharide units such as
sialic acids are sometimes removed and new units reattached during endosomal
recycling, without degradation of the underlying chain. The final complete
degradation of most eukaryotic glycans is generally performed by multiple
glycosidases in the lysosome. Once degraded, their individual unit
monosaccharides are then typically exported from the lysosome into the cytosol
for reutilization ([Figure
1.8](/books/NBK316258/figure/ch1.f8/?report=objectonly)). In contrast to the
relatively slow turnover of glycans derived from the ER–Golgi pathway, the
O-GlcNAc monosaccharide modifications of the nucleus and cytoplasm appear more
dynamic ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). In some instances,
extracellular or intracellular free glycans can also serve as signaling
molecules ([Chapter 40](/books/n/glyco3/ch40/)).

Unlike oligonucleotides and proteins, glycans are not commonly found in a
linear, unbranched fashion. Even when linear (e.g., GAGs), they often contain
a variety of substituents, such as sulfate groups, which are not uniformly
distributed. Thus, complete sequencing of glycans is usually impossible by a
single method and requires iterative combinations of physical, chemical, and
enzymatic approaches that together yield the details of structure (for a
discussion of low- and high-resolution separation and analysis, including mass
spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance [[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)], see [Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)).
Less detailed information on structure may be sufficient to explore the
biology of some glycans and can be obtained by simple techniques, such as the
use of enzymes (endoglycosidases and exoglycosidases), lectins, and other
glycan-binding proteins ([Chapters 48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/) and
[50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)), chemical modification or cleavage, metabolic
radioactive labeling, antibodies, or cloned glycosyltransferases ([Chapters
53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/) and [54](/books/n/glyco3/ch54/)).
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) can also be
perturbed in various ways, for example, by glycosylation inhibitors and
primers ([Chapters 55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/) and [56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/))
and by genetic manipulation of glycosylation in intact cells and organisms
([Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). Directed in vitro synthesis of glycans
by chemical and enzymatic methods has also made great strides in recent years,
providing many new tools for exploring glycobiology ([Chapters
53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/), [54](/books/n/glyco3/ch54/), and
[57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). The generation of complex glycan libraries by a
variety of routes has further enhanced this interface of chemistry and biology
([Chapters 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/) and [54](/books/n/glyco3/ch54/)),
including the generation of glycan microarrays.

Analogous to genomics and proteomics, glycomics represents the systematic
methodological elucidation of the “glycome” (the totality of glycan
structures) of a given cell type or organism ([Chapters
51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/) and [52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)). In reality, the
glycome is far more complex than the genome or proteome. In addition to the
vastly greater structural diversity in glycans, one is faced with the
complexities of glycosylation microheterogeneity (see above) and the dynamic
changes that occur in the course of development, differentiation, metabolic
changes, aging, malignancy, inflammation, or infection. Added diversity arises
from intraspecies and interspecies variations in glycosylation. Thus, a given
cell type in a given species can manifest a large number of possible glycome
states. Glycomic analysis today generally consists of extracting entire cell
types, organs, or organisms; releasing all the glycan chains from their
linkages; and cataloging them via approaches such as mass spectrometry. In a
variation called glycoproteomics, the glycans are analyzed while still
attached to protease-generated fragments of glycoproteins. The results
obtained represent a spectacular improvement over what was possible a few
decades ago, but they are still analogous to cutting down all the trees in a
forest and cataloging them, without attention to the layout of the forest and
the landscape ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/) discusses this complex
issue from the perspective of just one monosaccharide class, sialic acids; see
[Figure 15.3](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/figure/ch15.f3/?report=objectonly)).

Glycomic analysis thus needs to be complemented by classical methods such as
tissue-section staining or flow cytometry, using lectins or glycan-specific
antibodies that aid in understanding the glycome by taking into account the
heterogeneity of glycosylation at the level of the different cell types and
subcellular domains in the tissue under study. This is even more important
because of the common observation that removing cells from their normal milieu
and placing them into tissue culture can result in major changes in the
glycosylation machinery of the cell. However, such classical approaches suffer
from poor quantitation and relative insensitivity to structural details. A
combination of the two approaches is now potentially feasible via laser-
capture microdissection of specific cell types directly from tissue sections,
with the resulting samples being studied by mass spectrometry. New methods for
in situ imaging and characterization of glycans in the intact “forest” are
clearly needed.

Because most of the genes involved in glycan biosynthetic pathways have been
cloned from multiple organisms, it is possible today to obtain an indirect
genomic and transcriptomic view of the glycome in a specific cell type
([Chapter 8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)). However, given the relatively poor
correlation between mRNA and protein levels, and the complex assembly line and
competitive nature of the cellular Golgi glycosylation pathways, even complete
knowledge of the mRNA expression patterns of all relevant genes in a given
cell cannot allow accurate prediction of the distribution and structures of
glycans in that cell type. Thus, there is as yet no reliable indirect route
toward elucidating the glycome, other than by actual analysis using an array
of methods.

Many mutant variants of cultured cell lines with altered glycan structures and
specific glycan biosynthetic defects have been described, the most common of
which are lectin-resistant ([Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). Indeed, with
few exceptions, mutants with specific defects at most steps of the major
pathways of glycan biosynthesis have been found in cultured animal cells. The
use of such cell lines has been of great value in elucidating the details of
glycan biosynthetic pathways. Their existence implies that many types of
glycans are not crucial to the optimal growth of single cells growing in the
sheltered and relatively unchanging environment of the culture dish. Rather,
most glycan structures must be more important in mediating cell–cell and
cell–matrix interactions in intact multicellular organisms and/or interactions
between organisms. In keeping with this supposition, genetic defects
completely eliminating major glycan classes in intact animals all cause
embryonic lethality ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). As might be
expected, naturally occurring viable animal mutants of this type tend to have
disease phenotypes of intermediate severity and show complex phenotypes
involving multiple systems. Less severe genetic alterations of outer chain
components of glycans tend to give viable organisms with more specific
phenotypes ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). Overall, there is much to be
learned by studying the consequences of natural or induced genetic defects in
intact multicellular organisms, including humans ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

A major theme of this volume is the exploration and elucidation of the
biological roles of glycans. It is interesting to note that, in the short time
since the first edition, we have gone from asking “what is it that glycans do
anyway?” to having to explain a large number of complex and sometimes
nonviable glycosylation-modified phenotypes in humans, mice, flies, and other
organisms. Like any biological system, the optimal approach carefully
considers the relationship of structure and biosynthesis to function ([Chapter
7](/books/n/glyco3/ch7/)). As might be imagined from their ubiquitous and
complex nature, the biological roles of glycans are remarkably varied. Indeed,
asking what these roles are is akin to asking the same question about
proteins. Thus, all of the proposed theories regarding glycan function turn
out to be partly correct, and exceptions to each can also be found. Not
surprisingly for such a diverse group of molecules, the biological roles of
glycans also span the spectrum from those that are subtle to those that are
crucial for the development, growth, function, or survival of an organism
([Chapter 7](/books/n/glyco3/ch7/)). The diverse functions ascribed to glycans
can be simply divided into two general categories: (i) structural and
modulatory functions (involving the glycans themselves or their modulation of
the molecules to which they are attached) and (ii) specific recognition of
glycans by glycan-binding proteins. Of course, any given glycan can mediate
one or both types of functions. The binding proteins in turn fall into two
broad groups: lectins and sulfated GAG-binding proteins ([Chapters
27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/), [28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/), and
[38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). Such molecules can be either intrinsic to the
organism that synthesized the cognate glycans (e.g., see [Chapters
31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)–[36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/),
[38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/), and [39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)) or extrinsic
(see [Chapters 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/) and [42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/) for
information concerning microbial proteins that bind to specific glycans on
host cells). The atomic details of these glycan–protein interactions have been
elucidated in many instances ([Chapters 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/) and
[30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)). Although there are exceptions to this notion,
the following general theme has emerged regarding lectins: monovalent binding
tends to be of relatively low affinity, and such systems typically achieve
their specificity and function by achieving high avidity, via interactions of
multivalent arrays of glycans with cognate lectin-binding sites.

Whenever a new tool (e.g., an antibody or lectin) specific for detecting a
particular glycan is developed and used to probe its expression in intact
organisms, it is common to find exquisitely specific temporal and spatial
patterns of expression of that glycan in relation to cellular activation,
embryonic development, organogenesis, and differentiation (see [Chapter
41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/) for examples). Certain relatively specific changes
in expression of glycans are also often found in the course of transformation
and progression to malignancy ([Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)), as well
as other pathological situations such as inflammation ([Chapter
46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/)). These spatially and temporally controlled
patterns of glycan expression imply the involvement of glycans in many normal
and pathological processes, the precise mechanisms of which are understood in
only some cases.

Remarkably little is still known about the evolution of glycosylation. There
are clearly shared and unique features of glycosylation in different kingdoms
and taxa. Among animals, there may be a trend toward increasing complexity of
N- and O-glycans in more recently evolved (“higher”) taxa. Intraspecies and
interspecies variations in glycosylation are also relatively common. It has
been suggested that the more specific biological roles of glycans are often
mediated by uncommon structures, unusual presentations of common structures,
or further modifications of the commonly occurring saccharides themselves.
Such unusual structures likely result from unique expression patterns of the
relevant glycosyltransferases or other glycan-modifying enzymes. On the other
hand, such uncommon glycans can be targets for specific recognition by
infectious microorganisms and various toxins. Thus, at least some of the
diversity in glycan expression in nature must be related to the evolutionary
selection pressures generated by interspecies interactions (e.g., of host with
pathogen or symbiont). In other words, the two different classes of glycan
recognition mentioned above (mediated by intrinsic and extrinsic glycan-
binding proteins) are in competition with each other with regard to a
particular glycan target. The specialized glycans expressed by parasites and
microbes that are of great interest from the biomedical point of view
([Chapters 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/), [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/),
[23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/), and [43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)) are themselves
presumably subject to evolutionary selection pressures. These issues are
further considered in [Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/), which also
discusses the limited information concerning how various glycan biosynthetic
pathways appear to have evolved and diverged in different life-forms.

Numerous natural bioactive molecules are glycoconjugates, and the attached
glycans can have dramatic effects on the biosynthesis, stability, action, and
turnover of these molecules in intact organisms. For example, the sulfated
glycosaminoglycan heparin and its derivatives are among the most commonly used
drugs in the world. The aminoglycoside antibiotics all have carbohydrate
components essential for activity. For this and many other reasons,
glycobiology and carbohydrate chemistry have become increasingly important in
modern biotechnology. Patenting a glycoprotein drug, obtaining FDA approval
for its use, and monitoring its production all require knowledge of the
structure of its glycans. Moreover, glycoproteins, which include monoclonal
antibodies, enzymes, and hormones, are by now the major products of the
biotechnology industry, with sales in the tens of billions of dollars
annually, which continues to grow at an increasing rate. In addition, several
human disease states involve changes in glycan biosynthesis that can be of
diagnostic and/or therapeutic significance. The emerging importance of
glycobiology in medicine and biotechnology is discussed in [Chapters
56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/) and [57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/).

Although not traditionally considered part of
“[Glycobiology](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycobiology/),” many natural and
synthetic glycans are key components of Nanotechnology, Bioenergy, and
Material Science. Glyconanomaterials ([Chapter 58](/books/n/glyco3/ch58/))
have tunable chemical and physical properties and can be built on different
scaffolds to probe cellular, tissue, and organismal interactions. Attached
glycans can change nanomaterial properties, optimizing solubility and
biocompatibility and lowering cytotoxicity. Glyconanomaterials have been used
as imaging agents, spectroscopic tools, monitors of cellular systems, and
vehicles for vaccination and drug delivery. Plant glycans are used for many
purposes: energy sources, building materials, clothes, paper products, animal
feed, and food and beverage additives ([Chapter 59](/books/n/glyco3/ch59/)).
Concerns about detrimental environmental effects and diminishing reserves of
petroleum and its by-products have greatly renewed interest in using plant
glycans for energy production, generation of polymers with improved or new
functionalities, and as sources of high-value chemosynthetic precursors
([Chapter 59](/books/n/glyco3/ch59/)).

The authors acknowledge contributions to the previous version of this chapter
from the late Nathan Sharon, as well as helpful comments and suggestions from
all editors.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.002

This chapter covers the basic building blocks of glycans and fundamental
considerations regarding glycan structure by introducing chemical concepts.
Modes of linking glycans and structural depiction of the same are discussed to
provide the groundwork for understanding longer glycans ([Chapter
3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/)).

In this book, as well as in the earlier editions, the term glycan is used.
Still, a host of names are commonly used to refer to sugar polymers in other
textbooks and the literature. In the 19th century, sugar-based substances were
referred to as carbohydrates, or “hydrates of carbon,” that are based on the
general formula C _x_ (H2O) _n_ that also possess a carbonyl group, either an
aldehyde or a ketone. Monosaccharides are the simplest of these
polyhydroxylated carbonyl compounds (saccharide is derived from the Greek word
for sugar or sweetness).

Monosaccharides are joined together to give rise to oligosaccharides or
polysaccharides. Typically, the term “oligosaccharide” refers to any glycan
that contains less than 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic
linkages. The term “polysaccharide” is typically used to denote any linear or
branched polymer consisting of monosaccharide residues, such as cellulose
([Chapters 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/) and [24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). Thus,
the relationship of monosaccharides to oligosaccharides or polysaccharides is
analogous to that of amino acids and proteins, or nucleotides and nucleic
acids (polynucleotides).

The term “glycoconjugate” is often used to describe a macromolecule that
contains monosaccharides covalently linked to proteins or lipids. The prefix
“glycol” and the suffixes “saccharide” and “glycan” indicate the presence of
carbohydrate constituents (e.g., glycoproteins, glycolipids, and
proteoglycans). Just as is observed with proteins in nature, additional
structural diversity can be imparted to glycans by modifying their hydroxyl
groups with phosphate, sulfate, or acetyl esters and/or their amino groups
with acetyl or sulfate groups.

A carbohydrate may be termed “complex” if it contains more than one type of
monosaccharide building unit. The glucose-based polymer cellulose is an
example of a “simple” carbohydrate, whereas a galactomannan polysaccharide,
composed of both galactose and mannose, is an example of a complex
carbohydrate. However, even so-called simple glycans, such as cellulose and
starch, often have very complex molecular structures in three dimensions. The
term complex carbohydrates includes glycoconjugates, whereas the term
carbohydrates per se would not. Additional nomenclature issues are covered in
this chapter and [Chapter 3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/). A more detailed and
comprehensive listing of carbohydrate nomenclature rules has been published
(see McNaught 1997 and Varki et al. 2015 in Further Reading at the end of this
chapter), and [Online Appendix 1B](/books/n/glyco3/symbolnomenclature/).

The classification of monosaccharide structures began in the late 19th century
with the pioneering work of Emil Fischer. All simple monosaccharides have the
general empirical formula C _x_ (H2O) _n_ , where _n_ is an integer ranging
from 3 to 9. As mentioned briefly in [Chapter 1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/), all
monosaccharides consist of a chain of chiral hydroxymethylene units, which
terminates at one end with a hydroxymethyl group and at the other with either
an aldehyde group (aldoses) or an α-hydroxy ketone group (ketoses).
Glyceraldehyde is the simplest aldose and dihydroxyacetone is the simplest
ketose ([Figure 2.1](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f1/?report=objectonly)). The
structures of glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone are distinct in that
glyceraldehyde contains an asymmetric (chiral) carbon atom ([Figure
2.1](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f1/?report=objectonly)), whereas
dihydroxyacetone does not. With the exception of dihydroxyacetone, all
monosaccharides have at least one asymmetric carbon atom, the total number
being equal to the number of internal (CHOH) groups ( _n_ −2 for aldoses and
_n_ −3 for ketoses with _n_ carbon atoms). The number of stereoisomers
corresponds to 2 _k_ , where _k_ equals the number of asymmetric carbon atoms.
For example, an aldohexose with the general formula C6H12O6 and four
asymmetric carbon atoms (i.e., four (CHOH) groups) can be described in 16
possible isomeric forms ([Figure
2.1](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f1/?report=objectonly)).

The numbering of carbon atoms follows the rules of organic chemistry
nomenclature. The aldehyde carbon is referred to as C-1 and the carbonyl group
in ketoses is referred to as C-2. The overall configuration (D or L) of each
sugar is determined by the absolute configuration of the stereogenic center
furthest from the carbonyl group (i.e., with the highest numbered asymmetric
carbon atom; this is C-5 in hexoses and C-4 in pentoses). The configuration of
a monosaccharide is most easily determined by representing the structure in a
Fischer projection. If the OH (or other non-H group) is on the right in the
Fischer projection, the overall configuration is D. If the OH (or other non-H
group) is on the left, the overall configuration is L ([Figure
2.2](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f2/?report=objectonly)). This figure also
shows D- and L-glucose in the cyclic form (chair conformation) found in
solution. Most vertebrate monosaccharides have the D configuration with the
exception of fucose and iduronic acid (IdoA) L sugars. The Fischer projections
shown in [Figure 2.3](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f3/?report=objectonly)
illustrate the acyclic structures of all D-aldoses through the aldohexose
group.

Any two sugars that differ only in the configuration around a single chiral
carbon atom are called epimers. For example, D-mannose is the C-2 epimer of
D-glucose, whereas D-galactose is the C-4 epimer of D-glucose ([Figure
2.4](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f4/?report=objectonly)).
[Monosaccharide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/monosaccharide/) names are
frequently abbreviated; most common are three-letter abbreviations for simple
monosaccharides (e.g., Gal, Glc, Man, Xyl, Fuc). There are nine common
monosaccharides found in vertebrate glycoconjugates ([Figure
2.4](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f4/?report=objectonly)). Once incorporated
into a glycan, these nine monosaccharide building blocks can be further
modified to generate additional sugar structures. For example, glucuronic acid
(GlcA) can be epimerized at C-5 to generate IdoA. Many more monosaccharides
exist in glycoconjugates from other species and as intermediates in
metabolism. We use a symbolic notation for the monosaccharides that are most
abundant in vertebrate glycoconjugates (see [Chapter
1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/)).

Monosaccharides exist in solution as an equilibrium mixture of acyclic and
cyclic forms. The percentage of each form depends on the sugar structure. The
cyclic form of a monosaccharide is characterized by a hemiacetal group formed
by the reaction of one of the hydroxyl groups with the C-1 aldehyde or ketone.
For reasons of chemical stability, five- and six-membered rings are most
commonly formed from acyclic monosaccharides. Generally, aldohexoses form six-
membered rings via a C-1—O—C-5 ring closure; ketohexoses form five-membered
rings via a C-2—O—C-5 ring closure; aldohexoses form five-membered rings
through a C-1—O—C-4 ring closure ([Figure
2.5](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f5/?report=objectonly)). A five-membered
cyclic hemiacetal is labeled a furanose and a six-membered cyclic hemiacetal
is called a “pyranose.”

Monosaccharides can also be represented as Haworth projections in which both
five-and six-membered cyclic structures are depicted as planar ring systems,
with the hydroxy groups oriented either above or below the plane of the ring
([Figure 2.6](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f6/?report=objectonly)). Although
not truly representative of the three-dimensional structure of a
monosaccharide, the Haworth representation has been used since the late 1920s
as an easy-to-draw formula that permits a quick evaluation of stereochemistry
around the monosaccharide ring. The Haworth representations are preferably
drawn with the ring oxygen atom at the top (for furanose) or the top right-
hand corner (for pyranose) of the structure; the numbering of the ring carbons
increases in a clockwise direction.

For any D sugar, the conversion of a Fischer projection into a [Haworth
projection](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/haworthprojection/) proceeds as
follows: (1) any groups (atoms) that are directed to the right in the Fischer
structure are given a downward orientation in the Haworth structure, (2) any
groups (atoms) that are directed to the left in the Fischer structure are
given an upward orientation in the Haworth structure, and (3) the terminal
—CH2OH group is given an upward orientation in the Haworth structure. For an L
sugar, (1) and (2) are the same, but the terminal —CH2OH group is projected
downward.

The planar Haworth structures are distorted representations of the actual
molecules. The preferred conformation of a pyranose ring is the “chair”
conformation, similar to the structure of cyclohexane. The conversion from
[Haworth projection](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/haworthprojection/) to chair
conformation leaves the downward or upward orientation of ring substituents
unaltered. Two chair conformations can be distinguished and designated as 4C1
and 1C4, respectively ([Figure
2.7A](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f7/?report=objectonly)), and these
conformers can interconvert by a process called the “ring flip.” The first
numeral in the chair conformer designation (superscript) indicates the number
of the ring carbon atom above the “seat of the chair (C)” and the second
numeral (subscript) indicates the number of the ring carbon atom below the
plane of the seat (spanned by C-2, C-3, C-5, and the ring O). Chair
conformations are designated from structures with the ring oxygen atom in the
top right-hand corner of the ring “seat,” resulting in the clockwise
appearance of the ring numbering. To determine the stereochemistry in the
chair form as it corresponds to the Fischer projection, one can locate C-6 and
then trace along the carbon skeleton of the sugar, bisecting the C—O and C—H
bonds formed from each atom. The OH (or OR) and H groups are found on the
right (R) or left (L) sides, just as in the Fischer projection ([Figure
2.8](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f8/?report=objectonly)).

The more structurally accurate chair representations are preferred to Haworth
projections for depicting pyranoses. However, Haworth projections are
convenient and are commonly used to depict furanoses. The furanose ring is
rather flexible and not entirely flat in any of its energetically favored
conformations; for example, it has a slight pucker when viewed from the side,
as seen in the representations of the so-called envelope and twist (or skew)
conformations ([Figure
2.7B](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f7/?report=objectonly)). Because furanoses
can adopt many low-energy conformations, researchers have adopted the [Haworth
projection](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/haworthprojection/) as a simple means
to avoid this complexity.

When cyclized into rings, monosaccharides acquire an additional asymmetric
center derived from the carbonyl carbon atom ([Figure
2.5](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f5/?report=objectonly)). The new asymmetric
center is termed the “anomeric carbon” (i.e., C-1 in the ring form of
glucose). Two stereoisomers are formed by the cyclization reaction because the
anomeric hydroxy group can assume two possible orientations. When the
configurations (R or S) are the same at the anomeric carbon and the
stereogenic center furthest from the anomeric carbon, the monosaccharide is
defined as the α anomer. When the configurations are different, the
monosaccharide is defined as the β anomer ([Figure
2.9](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f9/?report=objectonly)). Unlike the other
stereocenters on the monosaccharide ring, which are configurationally stable,
the anomeric center can undergo an interconversion of stereoisomers via the
process of mutarotation. Catalyzed by dilute acid or base, the reaction
proceeds by the reverse of the cyclization reaction. The monosaccharide ring
opens up and then recloses to form a ring with the other anomeric
configuration ([Figure
2.5](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f5/?report=objectonly)). The term
mutarotation derives from the rapid change in optical rotation (denoted [α] D)
that is observed when an anomerically pure form of a monosaccharide is
dissolved in water. For example, β-D-glucopyranose shows an initial rotation
of +19°, whereas the α anomer shows an initial rotation of +112°. When either
anomer is allowed to undergo the mutarotation reaction, an equilibrium mixture
containing both anomers is obtained, producing a rotation of +52.5°.

Generally, the acyclic (aldehyde or ketone) form of a monosaccharide is only
present in minor amounts in an equilibrium mixture (<0.01%). Nevertheless, the
open-chain aldehydes or ketones can participate in chemical reactions that
drive the equilibrium and eventually consume the sugar.

Aldoses and ketoses were historically referred to as “reducing sugars” because
they responded positively in a chemical test that effected oxidation of their
aldehyde and hydroxyketone functionalities, respectively. The carboxylic acid
formed by oxidation of the aldehyde in an aldose is referred to as a glyconic
acid (e.g., gluconic acid is the oxidation product of glucose). It is also
possible to oxidize the hydroxyl groups of monosaccharides, most notably the
terminal OH group (i.e., C-6 of glucose). In this reaction, a glycuronic acid
is produced, and if both terminal groups are oxidized, the product is a
glycaric acid. The three acids derived from D-glucose are illustrated in
[Figure 2.10](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f10/?report=objectonly). These
compounds have a tendency to undergo intramolecular cyclization reactions,
preferably yielding six-membered lactones. Two examples of lactonization are
shown in [Figure 2.11](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f11/?report=objectonly).
Oxidized forms of monosaccharides can be found in nature. For example, GlcA is
an abundant component of many glycosaminglycans (see [Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

The carbonyl groups of aldoses and ketoses also can be reduced with sodium
borohydride (NaBH4) to form polyhydroxy alcohols, referred to as alditols.
This reaction is widely used to introduce a radiolabel at C-1 of the
monosaccharide by reduction with NaB3H4 ([Figure
2.11](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f11/?report=objectonly)).

The aldehyde and ketone groups of monosaccharides can also undergo Schiff base
formation with amines or hydrazides, forming imines and hydrazones,
respectively ([Figure
2.12](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f12/?report=objectonly)). This reaction is
often used to conjugate the monosaccharide to proteins (via their lysine
residues) or to biochemical probes such as biotin hydrazide. It should be
noted that the imines formed with amino groups are not stable to water and are
typically reduced with sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH3) in a process termed
reductive amination.

As aldehydes, reducing sugars can also form Schiff bases with amino groups of
the lysine residues in proteins. This nonenzymatic process that links glycans
to proteins is termed “glycation” and is distinct from “glycosylation,” which
involves the formation of a glycosidic bond between the sugar and protein.
[Glycation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycation/) products can undergo
further reactions that lead to the formation of protein cross-links, and these
can have pathogenic consequences (i.e., they are immunogenic and change the
properties of the protein). Glycation products of glucose accumulate at higher
levels in diabetics than in healthy individuals because of elevated blood
glucose levels. These modified proteins are thought to underlie some of the
pathologies associated with diabetes.

Two monosaccharide units can be joined together by a glycosidic bond—this is
the fundamental linkage among the monosaccharide building blocks found in all
oligosaccharides. The glycosidic bond is formed between the anomeric carbon of
one monosaccharide and a hydroxyl group of another. In chemical terms, a
hemiacetal group reacts with an alcohol group to form an acetal. Glycosidic
bonds can be formed with virtually any hydroxylated compound, including simple
alcohols such as methanol ([Figure
2.13](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f13/?report=objectonly)) or hydroxy amino
acids such as serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Indeed, glycosidic linkages are
formed between sugars and these amino acids within proteins to form
glycoproteins (see [Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and
[10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). Like the hemiacetal, the acetal or glycosidic
can exist in two stereoisomeric forms: α and β. But unlike the hemiacetal, the
acetal is configurationally stable under most conditions. Thus, once a
glycosidic bond is formed, its configuration is maintained indefinitely.
Furthermore, no oxidation or reduction can take place at an anomeric center
that is involved in a glycosidic bond. Like acetals in general, glycosidic
bonds can be hydrolyzed in dilute acid, generating the constituent
monosaccharides from oligosaccharides.

Glycosidic bond construction is the central challenge of glycan synthesis and
immense efforts have been devoted to high-yielding and stereoselective
glycosylation reactions. An overview of glycan synthesis strategies is
provided in [Chapters 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/) and
[54](/books/n/glyco3/ch54/).

The hydroxyl groups present in both monosaccharides and oligosaccharides can
be chemically modified without affecting the glycosidic linkages. Methylation
is used in the structural analysis of glycans (see [Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). Natural products containing partially methylated
glycans are known and a number of methyltransferases have been identified.

A variety of different enzymes can esterify the hydroxyl groups of glycans to
transiently vary glycan structure. Esterification is sometimes required for
interactions with other biomolecules. The most important types of sugar esters
in nature are phosphate esters (including diphosphate esters), acyl esters
(with acetic acid or fatty acids), and sulfate esters. Acyl esters can
sometime migrate to other hydroxyl groups on the same monosaccharide.

The replacement of monosaccharide hydroxyl groups with hydrogen atoms forms
deoxysugars. Nature has evolved reductases to perform this reaction in one
step, whereas chemically multistep procedures are required. Deoxygenation of
ribose within a ribonucleotide to form the 2-deoxyribonucleotide is a critical
reaction in DNA biosynthesis. Fucose (Fuc), one of the common vertebrate
monosaccharides, is deoxygenated at C-6 during its biosynthesis from mannose
([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)).

Many monosaccharides contain N-acetamido groups, such as GlcNAc, GalNAc, and
NeuNAc. Free amino groups, formed by de-N-acetylation of the N-acetamido
group, are rare and found in heparan sulfate (HS) ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors
([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)), neuraminic acid ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) and in many bacterial glycan structures ([Chapter
20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)). Amino groups can be modified with sulfates,
similar to hydroxyl groups, as found in HS.

A variety of linkages can be formed between two monosaccharides. The
glycosidic linkage can give rise to two possible stereoisomers at the anomeric
carbon of one sugar (α or β). Second, the many hydroxyl groups of the other
sugar permit several possible regioisomers. Two glucose residues for example,
can be joined together in numerous ways, as illustrated by maltose (Glcα4Glc)
and gentiobiose (Glcβ6Glc) ([Figure
2.14](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f14/?report=objectonly)). These isomers have
very different three-dimensional structures and biological activities.
Finally, a monosaccharide can engage in more than two glycosidic linkages,
thus serving as a branchpoint. The common occurrence of branched sequences (as
opposed to the linear sequences that are found in almost all peptides and
oligonucleotides) is unique to glycans and contributes to their structural
diversity.

The relationship of the glycosidic bond to oligosaccharides is analogous to
the relationship of the peptide bond to polypeptides and the phosphodiester
bond to polynucleotides. However, amino acids and nucleotides are linked in
only one fashion during the formation of polypeptides and nucleic acids,
respectively; there is no stereochemical or regiochemical diversity in these
biopolymers. The number of monomeric residues contained in an oligosaccharide
is designated in the nomenclature—disaccharide, trisaccharide, and so on. Just
as polypeptides have amino and carboxyl termini and polynucleotides have 5′
and 3′ termini, oligosaccharides have a polarity that is defined by their
reducing and nonreducing termini ([Figure
2.15](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f15/?report=objectonly)). The reducing end
of the oligosaccharide bears a free anomeric center that is not engaged in a
glycosidic bond and thus retains the chemical reactivity of the aldehyde.
However, it continues to be referred to as reducing end even when it is
engaged in a linkage (e.g., to the hydroxyl of serine or threonine in
glycoproteins). Structures are commonly written from the nonreducing end on
the left toward the reducing end on the right. For some structures, there is
no reducing end. For example, the common disaccharides sucrose and trehalose
have glycosidic linkages between the anomeric centers of two monosaccharide
constituents ([Figure
2.16](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f16/?report=objectonly)).

The glycosidic linkage is the most flexible part of a disaccharide structure.
Whereas the chair conformation of the constituent monosaccharides is
relatively rigid, the torsion angles around the glycosidic bond (φ, ψ, and ω;
[Figure 2.17](/books/NBK453086/figure/ch2.f17/?report=objectonly)) can vary.
Thus, a disaccharide of well-defined primary structure can adopt multiple
conformations in solution that differ in the relative orientation of the two
monosaccharides. The combination of structural rigidity and flexibility is
typical of complex carbohydrates and essential to their biological functions.

Glycans are linked to other biomolecules, such as lipids or amino acids within
polypeptides, through glycosidic linkages to form glycoconjugates (see
[Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/), [10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/),
[11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/), and [12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). Glycans are
often referred to as the glycone of a glycoconjugate and the noncarbohydrate
component is named the aglycone. The glycan may be a mono- or an
oligosaccharide.

In conclusion, monosaccharide building blocks can be linked to various regio-
and stereochemistries, and the resulting oligosaccharides can be assembled on
protein or lipid scaffolds (see [Chapter 3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/)).

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Carolyn R. Bertozzi and David Rabuka and appreciate helpful comments and
suggestions from Rahul Bhattacharya, Natalie Silmon De Monerri, Steve M.
Fernandes, and Alexandra Walker.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.003

This chapter discusses the diversity in structure and properties that results
when multiple monosaccharides ([Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)) are linked
together to form oligosaccharides and polysaccharides (the latter comprising
much of the biomass on the planet). Some examples of the more complex
polymeric assemblies that occur in nature are presented, and how these
remarkable structures are generated is discussed.

Except in their roles as sources of energy for living organisms, sugars seldom
occur in nature as monosaccharides. Instead they serve as building blocks for
more complex molecules. In the most common process, an initial sugar is linked
to an aglycone (often a lipid or a protein) and this sugar is further
elaborated by covalently joining other sugars through glycosidic linkages
([Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)) between the anomeric carbon of the sugar
being added and a hydroxyl oxygen of an existing sugar. The resulting glycans
are called oligosaccharides (usually less than a dozen monosaccharides) or
polysaccharides (usually more than a dozen monosaccharides). The latter are
usually built on a core of repeating subunits of linked monosaccharides. The
way in which assembly of both oligosaccharides and polysaccharides occurs
produces structures of enormous diversity and widely varying properties. This
allows glycans to fill roles that vary from cell-surface interactions with
proteins important in differentiation, recognition, and proliferation of
cells, to interactions with other glycans that generate the mechanical
properties of plant and microbial cell walls.

Diverse structures can be created by simply linking different monosaccharides
through glycosidic bonds, to make oligosaccharides or polysaccharides. The
diversity arises not only from the choice of sugars but also from the way they
are linked. If there were just one way to link monosaccharides, the choice
among the dozen or so commonly used sugars would make the resulting
polysaccharides more diverse than polynucleotides (four nucleotide choices for
DNA and RNA) but less diverse than polypeptides (20 amino acid choices for
mammalian proteins). However, the possibility of making glycosidic bonds
between the anomeric carbon of one sugar and any one of the unmodified
hydroxyl groups in another mono- or oligosaccharide adds to the diversity, by
allowing not only more linear products, but also branched products in which
more than one hydroxyl group on a given sugar is used to make glycosidic
bonds. In addition, each anomeric carbon is a stereogenic center and therefore
each glycosidic linkage can be constructed having either the α- or
β-configuration. Building an oligosaccharide, such as a tetrasaccharide (four
sugars) with an unlinked reducing end, using just a single sugar in one ring
form, such as glucopyranose, the authors could construct 1792 distinct
structures. Of course, not all of these theoretically possible molecules are
produced in nature because of the lack of enzymes to build them, but many are
made. The diversity contributes to a wide range of functional properties that
allow carbohydrates to play many important roles.

Branching is a prime characteristic of many glycans found on mammalian cell
surfaces. Glycans representing two major types of eukaryotic protein
glycosylation are shown in [Figure
3.1](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f1/?report=objectonly). An N-glycan makes a
glycosidic bond with the side-chain nitrogen of an asparagine residue that is
a part of a consensus peptide sequence NX(S/T). An O-glycan makes a glycosidic
bond with the terminal oxygen of a serine or threonine residue. N-Glycans
contain a core composed of three mannose residues and two _N_
-acetylglucosamine residues (Manα1-6[Manα1-3]Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-N-Asn).
The depicted glycan is a biantennary glycan with branches linked at the 3- and
6-positions of the first mannose residue in the glycan chain. However, more
complex structures exist with three and four branches. Details of the
synthesis and biological importance of these glycans are presented in [Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/). The depicted O-glycan contains a typical core
structure (one of four common cores) that begins at the reducing end with an
_N_ -acetylgalactosamine α-linked to a serine or threonine
(GlcNAcβ1-6[Galβ1-3]GalNAcα1-O-Ser/Thr). It begins as a biantennary structure,
but can branch further to a more complex structure toward the nonreducing end.
The synthesis and biological importance of O-glycans are described in
[Chapters 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/) (O-GalNAc) and
[19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/) (O-GlcNAc).

Both glycans depicted are terminated with a sialic acid (often Neu5Ac in
humans) at their nonreducing end. Sialylation is characteristic of mammalian
glycans and important for immune response. In protein–glycan interactions, not
only are particular residues recognized, but often their positioning in a
branching structure is recognized as well. An interesting example is the
interaction of the enzyme that adds the 2-6-linked sialic acids to the termini
of N-glycans. It has a high preference for adding to the 1-3-linked branch (by
more than an order of magnitude) despite the fact that the residues on both
branches are identical back to the mannose at the branch point
(Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2Manα-). This may give some indication of the extent to which
branching plays a role in recognition processes.

Linkage variation plays an important role in the structural properties of
polysaccharides as illustrated for two closely related glucose polymers having
repeating units (RUs) of -[4Glcβ1-]n and -[4Glcα1-]n. The former is the
structural polymer, cellulose, found in all plant cell walls and materials
such as wood and cotton. The latter is starch, an easily digestible material
with no significant structural utility. The ability of one polymer to
associate in long fibrils having both crystalline and amorphous regions
contributing to its structural properties, and the lack of these tendencies in
the other polymer, is clearly linked to the stereochemistry at the anomeric
carbon (β for cellulose and α for starch) and the preferred torsional angles
about the C1-O4 and O4-C4 bonds of the glycosidic linkages. The torsion angles
are referred to as φ and ψ, much the same as primary structural variables in
polypeptides; by International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC)
convention they are defined by four connected atoms, O5′-C1′-O4-C4 and
C1′-O4-C4-C3, respectively. Because the torsion angle can be monitored
directly through couplings between protons at the ends of the glycosidic
linkage observed in nuclear magnetic resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) spectra, an alternate NMR definition is
also in common use—namely, H1′-C1′-O4-C4 for ϕ and C1′-O4-C4-H4 for ψ.
Glycosidic torsion angles differ considerably in crystalline cellulose and
starch. Using IUPAC definitions they prefer ∼−95° and ∼+95° in the former and
∼+115° and ∼+120° in the latter. [Figure
3.2](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f2/?report=objectonly) depicts these
differences in the repeating disaccharide units of cellulose and starch as
represented by the isolated disaccharides having common names cellobiose and
maltose, respectively. These local preferences influence association
properties and ultimately structural characteristics. When extended to a long
cellulose polymer, cellobiose units generate elongated strands that can pack
and interact with other strands through hydrogen bonds to form layers. Layers
in turn interact through a combination of forces to form fibrils. The more
helical strands in starch cannot pack easily and result in a more amorphous
material.

Other important polysaccharides, such as pectins found in plant cell walls,
help plants accommodate changes during growth. Pectins are based on polymers
of α(1-4)-linked galacturonic acid (GalA) and may contain additional branching
sugars such as xylose. The negatively charged carboxyl group at the 6-position
of the GalA residues contributes to the water solubility of these polymers and
the long-range interactions that give them gelling properties useful in the
food industry. Oligo- and polysaccharides of plant origin are discussed in
detail in [Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/).

Animals also use polysaccharides for various purposes.
[Glycogen](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycogen/) is a storage polymer
related to starch in that it is a glucose polymer with primarily
α(1-4)-linkages connecting glucose residues, but it is highly branched having
additional α(1-6)-linkages to some of the glucose residues. Structural
polymers also exist; for example, the repeating polymer of _N_
-acetylglucosamine, -[4GlcNAcβ1-]n, is the primary component of chitin, the
material that forms the exoskeletons of arachnids, crustaceans, and insects
([Chapter 26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)). Modifications of glucose residues by
replacing the hydroxyl group at 2-position with an amine group and subsequent
N-acetylation change the structural properties significantly. These changes
allow for the formation of composites with proteins and minerals that lead to
additional variation in structure and function.

Most cell-surface polysaccharides found in animals belong to a class of
glycans known as glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Abundantly present on the cell surface as well as
in the extracellular matrix, GAGs are linear macromolecules with molecular
mass of >15,000 Da. The building blocks of most GAGs are composed of an amino-
substituted sugar and a hexuronic acid residue. Modifications on the sugar
residues, in particular the sulfation of hydroxyl or the amino groups, are
common. The sulfates and hexuronic acid carboxylate groups are negatively
charged under physiological conditions. Thus, GAGs are the most anionic
molecules present in the animal kingdom. Commonly found GAGs include
chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, heparan sulfate (HS), hyaluronic acid,
and keratan sulfate. These GAGs structurally differ in their disaccharide RUs.
For example, chondroitin sulfates consist of disaccharide RUs of
[4GlcAβ1-3GalNAcβ1-]n, whereas HS consists of disaccharide RUs of
[4GlcAβ1-4GlcNAcα1-]n or [4IdoAα1-4GlcNSα1-]n ([Figure
3.3A](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f3/?report=objectonly)), and keratan sulfate
is actually a sulfated polylactosaminoglycan ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Structural diversity of these polymers is
primarily a result of additional sulfation of hydroxyl groups and is discussed
below for the diverse HS polymers found in mammals. GAGs found in other
animals can be distinct from mammalian GAGs by virtue of further
modifications. For example, marine invertebrates can carry particularly unique
sulfation patterns (i.e., 3-O-sulfation on GlcA residues) and distinct side-
chain modifications (i.e., fucosylation on chondroitin sulfate).

GAGs show biological function primarily through their interactions with the
hundreds of GAG-binding proteins found on cellular surfaces and in
extracellular spaces. The structural factors that affect the strength and
specificity of binding are key to the elicitation of a proper biological
response. HS, the most studied member of the GAG family, provides a good
illustration of the wide range of physiological and pathophysiological
functions affected. HS, for example, is involved in trimolecular interactions
with growth factors and growth factor receptors, and thereby participates in
regulating embryonic development. HS interacts with proteases and protease
inhibitors in the blood to control the coagulation process, and binds to viral
envelope proteins as a receptor for viral infections. Also, heparin, a highly
sulfated form of HS, is a commonly used anticoagulant drug in the clinic. A
more complete discussion of the biological function of HS can be found in
[Chapters 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/) and [Chapter 38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/).
This section uses the interaction between HS and proteins to illustrate how
structural factors affect binding between GAGs and proteins in general.

The sulfation levels of HS isolated from tissues can vary significantly, from
0.6 to 2.4 sulfate groups per disaccharide unit. Sulfation can be found at the
amino group, C3 and C6 positions of glucosamine (GlcN) residues, and at the C2
position of iduronic acid (IdoA) and to a lesser extent at the C2 position of
glucuronic acid (GlcA) residues. The sulfate groups display negative charges
that, under physiological pH, directly interact with positively charged
residues from proteins, dictating binding affinities and selectivity.

Another factor that contributes to the structural complexity of HS is the
conformational flexibility of L-IdoA and its derivative, L-IdoA2S (2- _O_
-sulfo iduronic acid). Present in the pyranose form, the six-membered ring
structure of IdoA or IdoA2S can adopt either chair or skew-boat conformations
([Figure 3.3B](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f3/?report=objectonly)). Until now,
only the 4C1 chair conformation has been verified experimentally for GlcA and
GlcN in HS, but both the 1C4 chair and the 2SO conformations have been found
for IdoA2S residues in crystal structures containing HS. In solution,
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) studies show
IdoA2S and IdoA residues to be present in a mixture of 1C4 and 2SO
conformations. The conformational flexibility in IdoA residues likely allows
orientation of the sulfate groups in HS to maximize the binding affinity to
proteins. Structural elements that dictate preferences for one form over the
other, including the possible effects from the sulfated monosaccharide
sequences around the IdoA/IdoA2S residue, are subject to further
investigation.

A third factor contributing to structural diversity and selective interactions
with certain HS-binding proteins is the size of the sulfated saccharide
domains. The numerous structural elements involved in binding to
proteins—namely, sulfate groups, carboxylic groups, and hydrogen bonding
hydroxyl groups—typically are distributed across multiple saccharides of HS
chains. In fact, HS isolated from natural sources shows domain-like
structures, with clusters of six to eight saccharides forming the highly
sulfated domains known as S-domains. These regions are separated by stretches
of nonsulfated saccharide residues, consisting of GlcA-GlcNAc RUs, known as
NAc-domains. The S-domains contain primarily IdoA residues that likely
contribute the flexibility needed to optimize binding to proteins and elicit
desired biological activities. The contribution of NAc-domains to the
functions of HS has not been fully established. However, a possible role may
be to appropriately position S-domains in a single polysaccharide chain for
interaction with multiple proteins. One example is the interaction of heparin
with antithrombin and thrombin. In this trimeric complex, one part of the
heparin chain interacts with antithrombin, and another part of the heparin
chain interacts with thrombin. Between the antithrombin-binding domain and
thrombin-binding domain, a linker of six to seven saccharide residues exists.
Short heparin fragments that lack this linker domain fail to inhibit the
activity of thrombin.

Unlike proteins and nucleic acids, the biosynthesis of GAGs is not regulated
by a well-defined template. Instead, each member of the GAG family is
synthesized by a unique pathway ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). The HS
synthesis pathway, for example, involves multiple enzymes, including specific
glycosyltransferases (or HS polymerase), an epimerase, and several
sulfotransferases. Moreover, HS is biosynthesized as a polymer covalently
linked to a proteoglycan that consists of a core protein and polysaccharide
side chains; the functions of these proteoglycans are, in fact, dominated by
the properties of the HS chains added. Although this is a non-template-driven
process, the overall structures of HS generally remain unchanged between
generations. There is considerable interest in understanding the mechanism
that controls the structure of HS. The existing experimental evidence supports
the hypothesis that the substrate specificity of the biosynthetic enzymes and
the sequence of their actions regulate HS structures.

The biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate is less
understood than that of HS. [Chondroitin sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/chondroitinsulfate/) tends to be synthesized on different proteoglycan
core proteins and requires a different set of polymerases and
sulfotransferases than the enzymes specifically recognizing HS
polysaccharides. To synthesize the IdoA residues in dermatan sulfate, a
specialized epimerase is required. Hyaluronic acid biosynthesis is quite
different; it is not synthesized on a core protein, it does not take place in
the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi, and only requires one hyaluronic acid
synthase (a dual activity glycosyltransferase), as the polysaccharide does not
contain sulfate groups or IdoA residues ([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)).

The interactions of bacteria with their environment provide an excellent
example of how polysaccharide properties play an important role in an
organism's survival. Bacterial polysaccharides are especially diverse, in that
they can include a larger number of distinct sugar residues in their RUs
(usually two to six residues), and they can include branching. Many of them
are parts of bacterial cell membranes where they serve important structural
and protective roles. Because of their location on the outside of the cell,
bacterial polysaccharides such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs), capsular
polysaccharides (CPSs), and exopolysaccharides (EPSs) are often potent
antigens that elicit a strong immune response in humans. LPSs carry long
polysaccharides called O-antigens, and are unique to Gram-negative bacteria
where they constitute the major component of the outer leaflet of its outer
membrane. These types of bacteria may also carry CPSs forming a relatively
dense additional layer around the bacterial cell. Cell wall lipoteichoic acids
and teichoic acids are unique components of Gram-positive bacteria, which are
often surrounded by a CPS or a less dense EPS layer.

The variation in biosynthetic pathways among bacterial species is ultimately
responsible for the diversity in bacterial polysaccharides. The biosynthesis
of bacterial polysaccharides is discussed further in [Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/). Here the authors present a few examples to
illustrate how synthesis of backbone structures, branching, and
postpolymerization modification lead to a diverse set of polymer structures.
In one of the biosynthetic pathways, sugar residues are added sequentially
onto an anchor molecule; thus, the polymer is growing from the terminal,
nonreducing end until a termination entity/substituent is added that precludes
further chain elongation—for example, in the LPS-attached O-antigen
polysaccharide of _Escherichia coli_ O8 ([Figure
3.4A](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)). The polymer is
linear and although sugar residues are added step-by-step to form the
polysaccharide, RUs can be identified.

Some heteropolysaccharides contain two alternating sequentially added sugar
residues and a formal RU can be identified. Often a processive
glycosyltransferase is responsible for forming this pattern as is the case in
the synthesis of the O-polysaccharide of _Salmonella enterica_ O54 ([Figure
3.4B](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)). When two sugar
residues alternate, branched structures can be formed, as one sugar may give
rise to the polymer backbone and one a side chain.

Polysaccharides are not always built from the nonreducing end, and preformed
subunits can be used in the assembly. For example, synthesis of the _E. coli_
antigens O5ab and O5ac relies on a preformed linear oligosaccharide, with five
sugar residues constituting the RU. The oligosaccharide is built on an
undecaprenyl pyrophosphoryl glycoside anchor molecule. This oligosaccharide is
then added _onto_ another oligosaccharide–lipid anchor to grow the polymer
from the “reducing end.” Polymers can be linear when polymerization involves
the terminal sugar, or branched with one residue in the side chain and the
remaining sugar residues in the backbone when polymerization is taking place
at the penultimate sugar of the oligosaccharide. An example of the latter
product is the O-antigen of _E. coli_ O168 ([Figure
3.4C](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Branching can be introduced by the addition of sugars following polymer
backbone formation. _Helicobacter pylori_ O-antigens often contain human blood
group structures as part of their RUs. _N_ -acetyl-D-glucosamine and
D-galactose are added in a processive manner onto an undecaprenyl
pyrophosphoryl carrier, thereby forming a linear polysaccharide composed of
Galβ1-4GlcNAc (LacNAc) disaccharide RUs. Subsequently, L-fucosyl residues are
added onto the backbone polysaccharide resulting in branched Lewis-type
structures ([Figure 3.4D](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Bacterial saccharides consist of diverse monosaccharides ([Chapter
2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)) and 6-deoxy-hexoses like L-rhamnose or L-fucose as
well as rare sugars that are often found at the terminal position of the
oligosaccharide–lipid acceptors. On polymerization, the rare monosaccharides
become part of the side chain in branched structures and give rise to
structural epitopes that are characteristic for bacterial species. In some
cases these epitopes are the basis for molecular mimicry ([Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Furthermore, these sugar residues constitute the
terminal entity of the polysaccharide chain, which can be recognized by
antibodies of the immune system. The polysaccharide may also be decorated by
substituents such as amino acids, O-acyl, or phosphodiester groups. It is not
uncommon to find O-acetyl groups at the branch-point sugar residue, thereby
leading to a highly crowded substitution pattern in which all positions on the
sugar residue are either part of a glycosidic linkage or carry a nonsugar
substituent. Epitopes with well-defined three-dimensional structures are the
result of these spatial arrangements. Examples of diversity by substituent
addition are the O-antigens of _Shigella flexneri_ in which glucosyl,
O-acetyl, or phosphoethanolamine groups are added to the backbone ([Figure
3.4E](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Branching and substituent addition affect the properties of polysaccharide
solutions, such as gelling and high viscosity. Some polymers are known under
their commercial names gellan, welan, and rhamsan (S-194) ([Figure
3.4F](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)). The differences
between these and similar types of polymers are based on acyl substituents
such as O-acetyl or O-succinyl groups and side chains consisting of
L-Rha/L-Man, di-glucosyl or di-rhamnosyl groups, as well as an L-Rha/L-Man
backbone modification.

The size of polysaccharides produced by bacteria can vary widely. Whereas the
O-antigens in LPSs have less than 100 RUs, CPSs and EPSs have higher numbers
of RUs (103–105). Branched structures are often present in these
polysaccharides ([Figure
3.4G](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)) with either more
than one sugar residue in the side chain or with two branches within the RU.
Even more complex structures occur with branching of the side chain, but these
still show a well-defined RU. More information on these complex materials is
presented in [Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/).

Charge can significantly affect polysaccharide properties. Charged
polysaccharides form a common subclass of bacterial polymers and are mostly
present in the form of negatively charged sugar residues or as a result of the
addition of negatively charged substituents. Uronic acids (e.g., GlcA) and
nonulosonic acids (e.g., Neu5Ac, Sia) introduce negative charge into the RU,
thereby rendering the polysaccharide a polyanionic polymer, much like the GAGs
found in mammalian systems. Substituents on sugar residues such as pyruvate,
phosphate, or sulfate groups confer polyanionic character. The charged groups
can be present both in the polysaccharide backbone and the side chains.
Positively charged amines are sometimes present in the RU in conjunction with
a negatively charged group. The CPSs from _Neisseria meningitidis_ are
representative for these types of polysaccharides. Types B and C are
homopolymers of Neu5Ac and types W-135 and Y contain disaccharide RUs with
Neu5Ac and a hexose.

Flexibility is a significant variable in bacterial polysaccharides. Most of
the glycosidic linkages are formed by a hydroxyl group linked to a carbon atom
having two carbon atoms and one hydrogen atom as neighbors (i.e., positions
O2, O3, or O4 in pyranoses) and, consequently, two degrees of freedom at the
glycosidic linkage (namely, the torsion angles ϕ and ψ). However, when the
linkage is formed via O6, an additional degree of freedom becomes available at
the glycosidic linkage (namely, the torsion angle ω) because of the exocyclic
hydroxymethyl group in hexopyranoses. When a (1-6)-linkage is present in the
backbone of polysaccharides ([Figure
3.4G](/books/NBK453048/figure/ch3.f4/?report=objectonly)) it may result in a
less rigid polymer with higher flexibility and random coil character.
Likewise, the occurrence of this linkage in the side chains will make them
more flexible. When furanose residues are part of the polymer, different ring
conformations provide more options for introducing flexibility.

Cross-linking is another way that physical properties of bacterial
polysaccharides can be varied. The cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria
contains a particularly thick layer of peptidoglycan covalently cross-linked
via short peptide sequences. Furthermore, teichoic acid polymers, built from
glycerol or ribitol residues joined by phosphodiester linkages, are located
within the cell wall. Mono- or disaccharide amino sugars can be part of these
repetitive structures, thereby giving rise to different cell wall teichoic
acids. Polymers having a phosphodiester linkage in the backbone as part of the
RU are referred to as “teichoic acid type.” CPSs of _Haemophilus influenzae_
are built on this theme in which two (serotypes a and b) have RUs consisting
of [ribitol- _P_ -Hex-] _n_ and two others (serotypes c and f) are made of
[Hex- _P_ -Hex-] _n_.

In summary, bacterial polysaccharides highlight the many ways in which
diversity is built into oligo- and polysaccharides. Some diversity results
from a larger set of sugar residues, some from branching, and some from
modification with a wide variety of substituents, such as phosphate, sulfate,
acyl, and amino groups. This diversity gives rise to different physical
properties. It allows bacteria to mimic their hosts in an attempt to evade
detection, and it provides a means of distinguishing self from competitive
organisms. Structures discussed in this chapter are depicted in abbreviated
IUPAC/IUBMB (International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) form
in [Table 3.1](/books/NBK453048/table/CH3TB1/?report=objectonly) for
comparison to the common names, symbolic representations, and actual chemical
structures used in the text and figures. This chapter serves as a preview of
glycans discussed more thoroughly in the following chapters.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Carolyn R. Bertozzi and David Rabuka and appreciate helpful comments and
suggestions from Vivek Kumar, Jason W. Labonte, Ganesh Subedi, and Eillen
Tecle.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.004

This chapter provides an overview of glycosylation from the perspective of a
single cell, taking into account the patterns of expression, topology, and
other features of the biosynthetic and degradative enzymes that are common to
most cell types. The focus is mostly on the organization of glycosylation in
eukaryotic cells. [Chapters 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and
[22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/) further address prokaryotic glycosylation
mechanisms.

After more than three billion years of evolution, every free-living cell and
every cell type within multicellular organisms remains covered with a dense
and complex layer of glycans ([Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)). Even
enveloped viruses that bud from infected cells carry with them the
glycosylation patterns of the host. Additionally, most secreted molecules are
glycosylated and extracellular matrices of multicellular organisms are rich in
glycans and glycoconjugates. Matrices secreted by unicellular organisms when
they congregate (e.g., bacterial biofilms [[Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)]) also contain glycans. Thus, evolution has
repeatedly and consistently selected glycans as being the most diverse and
flexible molecules to position at the interface between cells and the
extracellular milieu. Possible reasons include their relative hydrophilicity,
flexibility, and mobility in aqueous environments and their extreme diversity,
allowing facile short-term and long-term adaptations to changing environments
and pathogen regimes.

In bacteria, Archaea, and fungi, glycans serve critical structural roles in
the cell wall and in resisting large differences in osmolarity between
cytoplasm and environment. In eukaryotes, both secretory proteins and membrane
proteins typically pass through an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–Golgi pathway,
the cellular system in which many major glycosylation reactions occur (see
below). Most proteins in the blood plasma of animals (with the exception of
albumin) are heavily glycosylated, and the glycosylation of these and other
secreted proteins may provide solubility, hydrophilicity, and negative charge,
thus reducing unwanted intermolecular interactions and protecting against
proteolysis. Cell-surface membrane proteins like receptors, adhesion
molecules, and channels are typically glycosylated, and this modification can
promote their proper folding, ensure their stability, and impact function.

The classic work of George Palade indicated that most cell-surface and
secreted proteins in eukaryotic cells are cotranslationally translocated into
the ER where they are folded, modified, and subjected to quality control
mechanisms. They then make their way via an intermediate compartment (IC)
through multiple stacks of the Golgi apparatus, finally being distributed to
various destinations from the _trans_ -Golgi network (TGN). Secretory pathway
proteins can be N-glycosylated, O-glycosylated, and modified with
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors, and some called proteoglycans are
modified with glycosaminoglycan chains. The enzymes involved in each of these
modification pathways are distinct. N-linked glycans and GPI anchors are
preassembled before being transferred to proteins and then further modified in
the ER–Golgi pathway. The stepwise assembly of O-linked glycans and
glycosaminoglycans, as well as the glycosylation of lipids, involve reactions
in both the ER and Golgi ([Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)–[13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/) and
[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). [Figure
4.1](/books/NBK453052/figure/ch4.f1/?report=objectonly) superficially depicts
some steps in the synthesis of the major glycan classes in the ER–Golgi
pathway of animal cells.

In the ER–Golgi pathway, some glycan chains are made on the cytoplasmic face
of intracellular membranes and flipped across to the other side, but most are
added to the growing chain on the _inside_ of the ER or the Golgi ([Figure
4.1](/books/NBK453052/figure/ch4.f1/?report=objectonly)). Regardless, the
portion of a molecule that faces the inside of the lumen of the ER or Golgi
will ultimately face the _outside_ of the cell or the inside of a secretory
granule or lysosome. To date, there are no well-documented exceptions to this
topological rule. Of course, these topological considerations are reversed for
nuclear and cytoplasmic glycosylation (see below), because the active sites of
the relevant glycosyltransferases for these reactions face the cytoplasm. Not
surprisingly then, the types of glycans found on the two sides of the cell
membrane so far appear to be distinct from each other.

Regardless of location, most glycosylation reactions use activated forms of
monosaccharides (often nucleotide sugars and in some cases lipid-phosphate-
linked sugars, such as dolichol phosphate mannose) as donors for
glycosyltransferases (see [Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/) for a listing of
some enzymes, their donors and corresponding transporters, and details about
their biochemistry). A variety of glycan modifications also occur in nature
([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). Of these, the most common are generated
by sulfotransferases, acetyltransferases, and methyltransferases, which use
activated forms of sulfate (3′phosphoadenyl-5′-phosphosulfate; PAPS), acetate
(acetyl-CoA), and methyl groups ( _S_ -adenosylmethionine; AdoMet),
respectively. Almost all donors for glycosylation reactions and glycan
modifications are synthesized within the cytoplasmic compartment, from
precursors of endogenous origin. In eukaryotes, most of these donors are
actively transported across a membrane bilayer by specific multipass
transporters, becoming available for reactions within the lumen of the
ER–Golgi pathway.

For many years, the nucleus and cytosol (which are topologically
semicontinuous via nuclear pores) were assumed to be devoid of glycosylation
capacity. It is now established that distinct glycoconjugates are synthesized
and reside within these compartments. Indeed, one of them (O-linked GlcNAc;
[Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)) may well be quantitatively the most
common type of glycoconjugate in many cells. Both the O-GlcNAc transferase
(OGT) responsible for synthesizing O-linked GlcNAc on nuclear and cytosolic
proteins and the O-GlcNAcase (OGA) that removes this monosaccharide are
soluble proteins in these compartments. In addition, select cytosolic proteins
can be modified with O-Glc, O-Fuc, or O-Man ([Chapters
18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/) and [19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).

Because prokaryotic cells do not have an ER–Golgi pathway, they typically
generate their cell-surface glycans at the interface of the cytoplasmic
membrane and the cytoplasm or in the periplasm (see below). Other
glycoconjugates like hyaluronan in vertebrate cells, chitin in invertebrate
cells, and cellulose in plant cells are synthesized on the cytoplasmic face of
the plasma membrane and simultaneously extruded across the membrane to the
outside ([Chapters 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/), [24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/),
and [26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)). The enzymes involved in the synthesis of
these glycoconjugates appear to mediate this extrusion. Typical eukaryotic
Golgi glycosylation enzymes have also been found at the cell surface or as
soluble forms in the extracellular space, as described below. Whether these
glycosyltransferases would routinely have adequate supplies of nucleotide
sugar donors to modify cell-surface glycans is unclear, but at least one
example has been documented (see below). On the other hand, there are examples
of remodeling of cell-surface glycans in animal cells—for example, the Sulf
enzymes that modify heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycan ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) and endogenous sialidases that remove cell-surface
sialic acids ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). Some protozoan parasites,
such as trypanosomes, transfer sialic acids from host glycoconjugates to their
cell-surface glycans using _trans_ -sialidases.

Prokaryotic assembly pathways of polysaccharides and oligosaccharides are very
similar to pathways found in the ER and the plasma membrane of eukaryotes.
They are assembled in the cytoplasm and then translocated across the plasma
membrane. For many biosynthetic pathways, such as O-antigen biosynthesis in
Gram-negative bacteria, N-linked protein glycosylation in Archaea, and some
Gram-negative bacteria or S-layer biosynthesis in Gram-positive bacteria,
oligosaccharides are assembled on lipid carriers at the inner site of the
plasma membrane and then flipped to the periplasmic site ([Chapters
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)). Synthesis of
oligosaccharides can continue in the periplasm, but for these reactions,
isoprenoid-linked monosaccharides serve as activated substrates as is the case
in cell wall biogenesis of actinobacteria (mycobacteria) ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)).

Much effort has gone into understanding the mechanisms of glycosylation and
glycan modification within the ER and the Golgi apparatus, and it is clear
that a variety of interacting and competing factors determine the final
outcome of the reactions. The glycosyltransferases and processing glycosidases
are well studied ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)), and their location has
helped to define various functional compartments of the ER–Golgi pathway.

Despite lack of sequence homology among different glycosyltransferase
families, most Golgi enzymes share some features. Early studies of vertebrate
glycosyltransferases found some of these activities in soluble form in
secretions and body fluids; others were identified as membrane-bound
activities within cells, and some showed both properties. Subsequent molecular
cloning defined the sequences of Golgi glycosyltransferases, revealing that
they share a common topology and domain structure that can account for these
observations.

The majority of Golgi glycosylation enzymes are type II membrane proteins
consisting of three parts: an amino-terminal cytoplasmic tail, followed by a
transmembrane (TM) region that also acts as an uncleavable signal sequence,
and a large carboxy-terminal region containing a membrane proximal,
proteolytically sensitive stem region as well as a large catalytic domain. The
type II topology of these Golgi enzymes places their catalytic sequences in
the Golgi lumen, where they participate in the synthesis of the glycan chains
on proteins and lipids during their transit through the secretory pathway
([Figure 4.2](/books/NBK453052/figure/ch4.f2/?report=objectonly)).

Many Golgi enzymes are secreted by cells, sometimes in large quantities, and
can be found in cell culture supernatants and various body fluids. These
soluble, secreted enzymes are derived from their membrane-associated forms by
one or more proteolytic cleavage events that occur within the enzyme's stem
region ([Figure 4.2](/books/NBK453052/figure/ch4.f2/?report=objectonly)).
These cleavage events are catalyzed by proteases in the _trans_ regions of the
Golgi and in post-Golgi compartments. The production of soluble enzymes from
cell types such as hepatocytes and endothelium can be dramatically up-
regulated under inflammatory conditions. Because circulating and cell-surface
localized glycosyltransferases are not expected to have access to adequate
concentrations of donor nucleotide sugars (primarily located inside cells), it
was thought that they should be functionally incapable of performing transfer
reactions in extracellular spaces. However, recent evidence suggests that the
release of nucleotide sugar donors by activated platelets may allow soluble,
secreted sialyltransferase ST6Gal-I to modify glycans on cell surfaces beyond
the original source of the enzyme.

Not all glycosylation enzymes in the secretory pathway are type II membrane
proteins. For example, the UDP-GlcNAc:lysosomal enzyme
N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase (GlcNAc-phosphotransferase) is a
multisubunit complex and the GlcNAc-1-phosphodiester α-N-acetylglucosaminidase
is a type I membrane protein with its amino terminus in the lumen of the
Golgi. These enzymes are involved in the synthesis of the Man-6-P targeting
signal of newly synthesized lysosomal hydrolases (see [Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). Some ER glycosylation enzymes are synthesized as
soluble proteins. These include the UDP-glucose glycoprotein
glucosyltransferase (UGGT) involved in ER quality control ([Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)), and enzymes involved in epidermal growth factor
(EGF) repeat or thrombospondin repeat ([TSR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/thrombospondinrepeatstsr/)) glycosylation such as the two protein
O-fucosyltransferases, POFUT 1 (EGF) and 2 (TSR), protein
O-glucosyltransferase 1 (POGLUT1; EGF), and β1-3-glucosyltransferase (B3GLCT;
TSR) ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). In addition, one of the
sulfotransferases involved in heparan sulfate synthesis, GlcNAc
3-O-sulfotransferase 1, is a soluble enzyme in the Golgi.

All forms of glycosylation in the secretory pathway are highly ordered and
sequential processes, typically involving glycosyltransferase reactions. These
enzymes, their glycan substrates (attached to protein or lipid), and the
appropriate nucleotide sugar donor, must be located in the same compartment.
Biochemical and ultrastructural studies indicate that glycosyltransferases
segregate into distinct overlapping compartments within the secretory pathway.
Generally speaking, enzymes acting early in the biosynthetic pathway localize
to _cis_ and _medial_ Golgi compartments, whereas those acting later in the
pathway tend to localize in the _trans_ -Golgi cisternae and the TGN. These
observations prompted extensive exploration of mechanisms whereby
glycosyltransferases and processing glycosidases achieve this compartmental
segregation. Early studies were directed at identifying enzyme sequences
required for their retention in the Golgi cisternae per the vesicular
transport model of protein trafficking, whereas more recent studies have
included the framework of the cisternal maturation model (see below).

The view of how proteins traverse the Golgi stack and how Golgi enzymes
“retain” their relative positions in the Golgi cisternae has evolved
substantially in the recent past and includes the two primary models mentioned
above. These models are not mutually exclusive and may function together in
cells. The vesicular transport model posits that the Golgi is a stable
compartment, and that cargo proteins are transported in coated vesicles from
the ER to an intermediate compartment and between each Golgi cisterna in a
vectorial fashion, during which time these proteins are modified by Golgi
glycosylation enzymes retained in each cisterna. More recent data support a
cisternal maturation model that can explain the intra-Golgi transport of
larger cargo molecules, which cannot fit into small transport vesicles
([Figure 4.2](/books/NBK453052/figure/ch4.f2/?report=objectonly)). In this
model, a new Golgi cisterna is formed on the _cis_ face of the stack by the
transport of cargo molecules in COPII-coated vesicles from the ER to an
intermediate compartment, and the retrograde transport of _cis-_ Golgi enzymes
in COPI-coated vesicles from an “older” _cis_ cisterna into the newly formed
compartment that then becomes the _cis_ cisterna. The cisterna and its cargo
mature as later Golgi glycosylation enzymes are sequentially transported into
the “younger” cisternae. The cisternae progress and mature until they
effectively dissolve at the TGN stage as membrane and cargo are transported to
the plasma membrane for residence or constitutive secretion, to secretory
granules for regulated secretion, or to the endosome/lysosome system. The
cisternal maturation model is thus distinct from the vesicular transport model
in that Golgi enzymes are not retained in stable compartments, but
continuously transported in a retrograde fashion to “mature” younger cisternae
and their cargo.

The role of the cisternal maturation in Golgi enzyme localization is supported
by observations that mutations in conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex
proteins involved in retrograde vesicular transport impact Golgi enzyme
distribution and overall protein glycosylation. The COG complex is a hetero-
oligomer of eight subunits that is believed to function as a cytoplasmic
tethering complex that links incoming vesicles to their target compartments
before vesicle fusion. This complex is thought to cooperate with COPI subunits
in retrograde vesicular transport related to intra-Golgi and Golgi-to-ER
trafficking. Mutations in COG subunits lead to the instability and/or
mislocalization of several Golgi glycosyltransferases across the stack leading
to corresponding glycosylation defects. The COG complex does not directly
interact with Golgi enzymes, but it is critical for retrograde vesicular
transport in the Golgi system and in this way impacts overall Golgi structure,
and thus ensures efficient glycosylation. Notably, several congenital
disorders of glycosylation type II (CDG-II) are the result of mutations in COG
subunits ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

Studies using mutant and chimeric Golgi enzymes showed that different enzymes
have different requirements for their localization. Early work pointed to the
TM regions of enzymes such as the GlcNAcT-1 ( _medial_ Golgi), GalT-1 (
_trans_ -Golgi), and ST6Gal-I ( _trans_ -Golgi and TGN), but later studies
revealed that for many enzymes, multiple signals and mechanisms are
responsible. The role of both homo- and hetero-oligomerization in the
localization of some Golgi enzymes has been established. In addition,
substantial evidence supports the role of glycosyltransferase cytoplasmic
tails in enzyme retrograde transport and Golgi localization (see below).

The length and hydrophobicity of a membrane protein's TM region determine its
ability to partition into membrane microdomains and are now appreciated to be
involved in membrane protein trafficking and localization throughout the cell.
Both the concentration of cholesterol and the width of the membrane increase
throughout the secretory pathway with the widest, most cholesterol-rich
membranes found at the cell surface. Experiments using cholesterol-containing
model membranes showed that shorter TM peptides partition into thinner
membranes, whereas longer TM peptides partition into thicker membranes. It is
possible that cholesterol's tendency to “straighten” the lipid acyl chains may
make it more energetically difficult to partition TM peptides into membranes
with mismatched thicknesses. In support of the idea that membrane thickness
may contribute to membrane protein localization in the secretory pathway, it
has been noted that ER proteins have shorter TM regions than plasma membrane
proteins, and that the TM regions of Golgi enzymes are intermediate between
those of ER and plasma membrane proteins. However, among the Golgi enzymes
there is not a strict increase in TM length as one moves from the _cis_ to the
_trans_ face of the organelle. One possibility is that the relative impact of
TM region length on cisternal localization depends on what other sequences and
mechanisms are involved in the localization of a specific enzyme.
Nevertheless, at minimum, the shorter TM regions of Golgi enzymes may prevent
these proteins from leaving the Golgi system by reducing their ability to
partition to the thicker, cholesterol-rich membranes of carriers destined for
post-Golgi compartments like the plasma membrane ([Figure
4.2](/books/NBK453052/figure/ch4.f2/?report=objectonly)).

Another mechanism contributing to Golgi localization of enzymes is their
ability to form oligomeric complexes ([Figure
4.2](/books/NBK453052/figure/ch4.f2/?report=objectonly)). Nearly all enzymes
in the N-linked and O-linked glycosylation pathways form homodimers, and many
also form heteromeric complexes. In some cases, heteromeric complex formation
is pH dependent. Heteromeric complex formation is observed between enzymes
that catalyze sequential reactions in the same pathway and that are localized
in the same cisternae. For example, in the N-glycosylation pathway, complexes
are formed between two N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases (GlcNAcT-I and
GlcNAcT-II) in the _medial_ Golgi, and between GalT-I and ST6Gal-I in the
_trans-_ Golgi. Notably, enzymes not in the same pathway (e.g.,
O-glycosylation and N-glycosylation enzymes), and enzymes in the same pathway,
but which catalyze competing or nonsequential events, do not form heteromeric
complexes even if they are localized in the same cisterna. Complexes between
sequential enzymes in a pathway could increase the efficiency of glycosylation
by promoting substrate channeling, wherein one enzyme hands the newly modified
substrate off to the next enzyme in the pathway.

Taken together, evidence indicates that glycosylation enzymes use multiple
mechanisms to maintain their Golgi localization. The number of signals and
mechanisms used by an enzyme could determine how stable its Golgi localization
is, whether it is able to move to a later compartment, and whether it is
cleaved and secreted into the extracellular space.

There are scattered reports of glycosylation in unexpected locations, for
example, gangliosides in mitochondria and GAGs and N-glycans in the nucleus.
Many of these claims are based on incomplete evidence ([Chapter
18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/)). One possibility is that there are indeed glycans
in these unexpected locations, but that their true structures are novel.
Conversely, although structural evidence might be strong, there may be
inadequate evidence to be certain about the topology of the claimed
structures. Regardless, past experience tells us that the cell biology of
glycosylation can hold many surprises, and dogmatic positions about such
controversial issues are not warranted.

Like all components of living cells, glycans turn over constantly. Some
glycoconjugates, such as transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans, turn
over by shedding from the cell surface through limited proteolysis. Most
glycoconjugate turnover occurs by endocytosis and subsequent degradation in
lysosomes ([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). Endoglycosidases can
initially cleave glycans internally, producing substrates for exoglycosidases
in the lysosome. Once broken down, individual monosaccharides are then
typically exported from the lysosome into the cytoplasm, so that they can be
reused (Figure 1.8, [Chapter 1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/)). In contrast to the
relatively slow turnover of glycans derived from the ER–Golgi pathway, glycans
of the nucleus and cytoplasm may be more dynamic and rapidly turned over
([Chapters 18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/) and [19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).
Glycans in bacterial cells (especially those in the cell wall) also turn over
during cell division when the cell wall undergoes cleavage and remodeling.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Jeffrey D. Esko and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Chrissa
Dwyer, Simone Kurz, and Daniel Sandoval.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.005

In nature, most glycans are synthesized by glycosyltransferases, enzymes that
transfer activated forms of monosaccharides from nucleotide sugars and lipid-
linked sugar intermediates to acceptors including proteins, lipids, and
growing glycan chains. [Monosaccharide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/monosaccharide/) precursors are imported into the cell, salvaged from
degraded glycans, or created enzymatically from other sugars within the cell.
In eukaryotic cells glycosylation occurs mostly in the Golgi apparatus, even
though monosaccharide activation and interconversions occur mostly in the
cytoplasm. Nucleotide sugar–specific transporters carry activated sugar donors
into the Golgi. In some cases, nucleotide sugars are used to synthesize
activated lipid-linked intermediates before glycan transfer. This chapter
describes how cells accomplish these tasks, with an emphasis on animal cells.

Glucose and fructose are the major carbon and energy sources for organisms as
diverse as yeast and humans. Most organisms can synthesize the other
monosaccharides needed for glycan biosynthesis from these sources. Not all of
these biosynthetic pathways are equally active in all types of cells. However,
there are some general principles. Monosaccharides must be activated to a
high-energy donor for use in glycan synthesis. This process requires
nucleoside triphosphates (such as UTP or GTP) and a glycosyl-1-P
(monosaccharide with a phosphate at the anomeric carbon). They can be
activated by a kinase (reaction 1) or generated from a previously synthesized
activated nucleotide sugar (reactions 2 and 3):

![Image ch5uf01.jpg](/books/NBK453043/bin/ch5uf01.jpg)

The most common nucleotide sugar donors in animal cells are shown in [Table
5.1](/books/NBK453043/table/CH5TB1/?report=objectonly). [Sialic
acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) and their evolutionary
ancestors (prokaryotic nonulosonic acids and Kdo) are the only monosaccharides
in animals activated as CMP-mononucleotides. Iduronic acid does not have a
nucleotide sugar parent because it is formed by epimerization of glucuronic
acid after it is incorporated into glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains. In some
instances, one nucleotide sugar can be formed from another either by direct
epimerization (reaction 2 above) or by a nucleotide exchange reaction
(reaction 3 above). For example, UDP-Gal is made from UDP-Glc by exchange of
Gal-1-P for Glc-1-P.

Three types of sugar transporters carry sugars across the plasma membrane into
cells. First are energy-independent facilitated diffusion transporters such as
the glucose transporter (GLUT) family of hexose transporters found in yeast
and most mammalian cells. The genes encoding these proteins are named _SLC2A_
(solute carriers 2A). Second are energy-dependent transporters—for example,
the sodium-dependent glucose transporters (SGLT; gene names _SLC5A_ ) in
intestinal and kidney epithelial cells. The third type includes transporters
that couple ATP-dependent phosphorylation with sugar import. These are found
in bacteria ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)) and are not covered in this
chapter.

GLUT family transporters were first described in yeast, where at least 18
genes are now known. Humans have 14 GLUT homologs. GLUT transporters range in
size from (∼40–70 kDa) and have similar structures containing 12 membrane-
spanning domains, which is typical of many eukaryotic transporters. The
transmembrane domains form a barrel with a small pore for sugar passage.
Compared with GLUT1, the other family members have a modest 28%–65% amino acid
identity. There are “sugar transporter signatures” consisting of one or a few
amino acids in specific positions relative to the membrane-spanning domains,
but no major transporter motifs.

Typically, the GLUTs have Km values for glucose uptake in the 1–20 mm range.
In yeast, many transport glucose, but others are specific for galactose,
fructose, or disaccharides. Most mammalian GLUT proteins transport glucose or
fructose with variable efficiency, but without fully characterized
specificity. However, GLUT5 primarily transports fructose, and the GLUT called
HMIT is a proton-coupled _myo_ -inositol transporter. GLUT2 also efficiently
transports glucosamine.

Glucose is transported from the gut lumen by an energy-requiring Na+-dependent
glucose transporter (SGLT-1) and is recovered from the kidney filtrates by a
related transporter (SGLT-2). The SGLT-type transporters have Km values of <1
mm for glucose.

GLUT1–5 have different distributions among different mammalian cells and
different Km values that enable them to respond to the availability of
glucose. Although most of the human GLUT members are located on the cell
surface, a portion of GLUT4 resides in intracellular vesicles, which are
recruited to the cell surface in response to insulin. Following carbohydrate-
rich meals, glucose transported by SGLT-1 in the intestine is thought to
promote the recruitment of GLUT2 to the apical surface for enhanced glucose
uptake.

Monosaccharides can also be salvaged from glycans degraded within cells
([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). Most of the degradation occurs at low
pH in lysosomes. Salvage pathways have received relatively little attention,
but their contribution to glycosylation may be quite substantial. For example,
80% of the radiolabeled _N_ -acetylglucosamine from glycoproteins degraded in
liver lysosomes is converted into UDP-GlcNAc and at least one-third is used to
synthesize secreted glycoproteins. Also, fibroblasts endocytose labeled
glycans and reuse about 50% of the amino sugars for new glycoprotein
synthesis. Efficient salvage is not limited to GlcNAc. Much of the sialic acid
derived from endocytosed extracellular glycans may be reused for new
glycoprotein synthesis.

Monosaccharides released by degradation must exit the lysosome. Different
lysosomal carriers exist for neutral hexoses (glucose, mannose, and
galactose), N-acetylated amino sugars, and acidic sugars; the neutral sugar
carrier has a Km value of 50–75 mm for hexose substrates, but also transports
fucose and xylose. The _N_ -acetylhexosamine carrier (Km ∼ 4 mm) cannot
transport nonacetylated amino sugars. The sialic acid and glucuronic acid
carrier (Km ∼ 300–550 µm) is important because its loss leads to an
accumulation of these sugars in the lysosome and secretion into the urine,
with genetic mutations resulting in a human lysosomal storage disease
([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). Most monosaccharides that reach the
cytoplasm are activated and reused, as described below. However, the uronic
acids cannot be reused in animals and are degraded via the pentose phosphate
pathway. Mannose released from N-glycan processing or turnover is transported
out of the cell by a hexose transporter/exchanger with little or no direct
reutilization.

[Glycogen](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycogen/) is an immense molecule that
contains up to 100,000 glucose units, arranged in Glcα1–4Glc repeating
disaccharides with periodic α1–6Glc branches. It is synthesized on a
cytoplasmic protein called glycogenin ([Chapter 18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/)).
Glycogen is the major storage polysaccharide in animal cells, and its
synthesis and degradation (glycogenolysis) are highly regulated for energy
use. Glycogen is synthesized by the addition of single glucose units from UDP-
Glc, and it is degraded by glycogen phosphorylase. This non-ATP-dependent
reaction forms glucose-1-P by phosphorolysis of glycogen. This substrate can
be used directly to form UDP-Glc or converted to glucose-6-P for further
catabolism via glycolysis or direct oxidation via glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase.

Glucose is the central monosaccharide in carbohydrate metabolism, and it can
be converted into all other sugars ([Figure
5.1](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f1/?report=objectonly)). Glucose is first
converted to glucose-6-P by hexokinase. In the glycolytic pathway, glucose-6-P
is converted to fructose-6-P by phosphoglucose isomerase or into glucose-1-P
by phosphoglucomutase. Reaction of glucose-1-P with UTP forms the high-energy
donor UDP-Glc. The UDP-Glc pool is quite large, and it is used to synthesize
glycogen and other glucose-containing molecules such as glucosylceramide
([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) and dolichol-P-glucose, which is used in
the N-linked glycan biosynthetic pathway ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)).

Some glucose-6-phosphate is the substrate for glucose-6-P dehydrogenase, the
entry point for the oxidation via the pentose phosphate pathway that
subsequently produces 6-phosphogluconate and then ribose-5-phosphate. These
reactions generate nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), which
is needed to maintain proper redox status.

UDP-GlcA (glucuronic acid) is synthesized directly from UDP-Glc by a two-stage
reaction requiring two NAD+-dependent oxidations at C-6. UDP-GlcA is used
primarily for GAG biosynthesis ([Chapters 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/) and
[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), but some N- and O-linked glycans and
glycosphingolipids contain glucuronic acid as well. The addition of glucuronic
acid to bile acids and xenobiotic compounds (such as drugs and toxins)
increases their solubility, and a large class of glucuronosyltransferases is
devoted to these reactions.

Iduronic acid is the C-5 epimer of GlcA, and it is found in GAGs dermatan
sulfate, heparan sulfate, and heparin. Unlike all other monosaccharides found
in glycans, iduronic acid is not directly synthesized from a nucleotide sugar
donor. Instead, it is generated by epimerization of GlcA following its
incorporation into the growing GAG chain ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

Decarboxylation of UDP-GlcA gives UDP-Xyl, which is used to initiate GAG
synthesis ([Figure 5.2](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f2/?report=objectonly);
[Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) in vertebrates. Xylose is also found on
proteins that have O-glucose modifications in epidermal growth factor (EGF)
modules ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)) and on O-mannose-based glycans
on α-dystroglycan ([Chapters 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/) and
[45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)), as well as on plant N-glycans. A type II
membrane protein performs the decarboxylation reaction using UDP-GlcA
transported into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or Golgi. In _Caenorhabditis
elegans_ ( _C. elegans_ ), the decarboxylase is called SQV-1, and it
colocalizes with the UDP-GlcA transporter ([Chapter
25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)). In _Arabidopsis_ , another UDP-GlcA decarboxylase
also occurs in the cytoplasm, but no ortholog has been identified in animals.

Mannose is used for multiple types of glycans ([Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/), [11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/),
[12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/), and [13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). Guanosine
diphosphate mannose (GDP-Man) is the primary activated donor. Its production
requires prior synthesis of mannose-6-P and its conversion to mannose-1-P. Two
ways to produce mannose-6-P are by direct phosphorylation via hexokinase or
conversion of fructose-6-P to mannose-6-P using the enzyme phosphomannose
isomerase. In yeast, loss of the latter enzyme is lethal. In humans, loss of
this enzyme produces a potentially fatal disease called congenital disorder of
glycosylation (CDG-type Ib or MPI-CDG) ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).
Phosphomannose isomerase is important because free exogenous mannose is not
common in the diet, and this enzyme is the key link between mannose and
glucose. Both yeast and human phosphomannose isomerase deficiencies can be
rescued by providing exogenous mannose, but too much mannose is toxic. Mice
totally lacking phosphomannose isomerase activity die in utero because of an
accumulation of Man-6-P that inhibits glycolysis and depletes ATP. In mammals,
mannose-6-P is converted to mannose-1-P using phosphomannomutase. Because
mannose-6-P and mannose-1-P are both obligate precursors of GDP-Man, failure
to make sufficient amounts of either one reduces the formation of GDP-Man,
which is a direct donor for lipid-linked oligosaccharides (see below) and a
precursor for dolichol-P-mannose, which serves multiple glycosylation
pathways.

Mannose-6-P can also condense with phosphoenolpyruvate to form 2-keto-3-deoxy-
D-glycero-D-galactonononic acid (KDN). This molecule is activated with CTP to
produce CMP-KDN, and is abundant in fish (e.g., in trout testis and on their
sperm), where it is thought to be important for sperm–egg adhesion.

Guanosine diphosphate fucose (GDP-Fuc) can be derived from GDP-Man by the
sequential action of two enzymes involving three steps. In the first step, the
C-4 hydroxyl group of GDP-Man is oxidized to a ketone (GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-
mannose) by the enzyme GDP-Man 4,6-dehydratase along with the reduction of
NADP+ to NADPH. The next two reactions are catalyzed by a single polypeptide
that has epimerase and reductase activity and is well conserved from bacteria
to mammals. GDP-4-keto-6-deoxymannose is epimerized at C-3 and C-5 to form
GDP-4-keto-6-deoxyglucose, which is then reduced with NADPH at C-4 to form
GDP-Fuc ([Figure 5.3A](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f3/?report=objectonly)).
The first dehydration step is feedback inhibited by GDP-Fuc. GDP-Fuc can also
be synthesized directly from fucose. The first step uses a kinase to make
fucose-1-P, which is then converted to GDP-Fuc. Mutant CHO cells that cannot
convert GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc form hypofucosylated proteins, but this can be
corrected by providing exogenous fucose in the medium. Also, mice genetically
deficient in the GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc conversion can be rescued by providing
fucose in their food or drinking water. Plasma membrane transporters for
sugars other than glucose have been characterized and fucose transporters may
exist as well, although they have not been fully characterized, so their
quantitative contribution is not known. As with many monosaccharides other
than glucose, free fucose concentration in the blood is in the very low
micromolar range.

Activated uridine diphosphate galactose (UDP-Gal) can be made by direct
phosphorylation at C-1 to give galactose-1-P, which reacts with UTP to form
UDP-Gal. Alternatively, galactose-1-P can be converted to UDP-Gal via a uridyl
transferase exchange reaction with UDP-Glc that displaces glucose-1-P. A
deficiency in this activity results in a severe human disease called
galactosemia, which leads to intellectual disability, liver damage, and
eventual death if galactose intake is not controlled ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). Finally, UDP-Gal can be formed from UDP-Glc by
the NAD-dependent reaction catalyzed by UDP-Gal 4-epimerase. The enzyme first
converts the C-4 hydroxyl group to a keto derivative forming NADH from bound
NAD+. In the next step, the keto group is converted back to a hydroxyl group
with opposite orientation and NAD+ reforms ([Figure
5.3B](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f3/?report=objectonly)). The same enzyme
interconverts UDP-GalNAc and UDP-GlcNAc.

Galactose usually occurs as a pyranose ( _p_ ) ring in “higher” animals, but
bacteria and pathogenic eukaryotes such as _Leishmania_ and _Aspergillus_
incorporate galactofuranose ( _f_ ) into their glycans ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). The donor is formed by conversion of UDP-Gal( _p_
)→UDP-Gal( _f_ ) using a flavin adenine dinucleotide–dependent mutase.

Synthesis of uridine diphosphate _N_ -acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) begins
with the formation of glucosamine-6-P from fructose-6-P by transamination
using glutamine as the –NH2 donor. Glucosamine-6-P is then N-acetylated via an
acetyl-CoA-mediated reaction to form _N_ -acetylglucosamine-6-P and then
isomerized to _N_ -acetylglucosamine-1-P via a 1,6-bis-phosphate intermediate.
Similar to the other activation reactions, _N_ -acetylglucosamine-1-P then
reacts with UTP to form UDP-GlcNAc and pyrophosphate. Alternatively, GlcNAc
can be directly phosphorylated to form _N_ -acetylglucosamine-6-P by a kinase
that also synthesizes _N_ -acetyl-mannosamine-6-P from _N_ -acetylmannosamine.
Phospho- _N_ -acetylglucosamine mutase then converts _N_
-acetylglucosamine-6-P to _N_ -acetylglucosamine-1-P. This route may account
for the efficient salvage of GlcNAc from lysosomal degradation of glycans.
Glucosamine can also be salvaged following sequential phosphorylation and
acetylation.

Uridine diphosphate _N_ -acetylgalactosamine (UDP-GalNAc) can arise from two
routes. One is the direct reaction of _N_ -acetylgalactosamine-1-P with UTP.
_N_ -Acetylgalactosamine-1-P is formed by a specific kinase that is distinct
from galactose-1-kinase. UDP-GalNAc can also be formed by epimerization of
UDP-GlcNAc using the same NAD-dependent epimerase that converts UDP-Glc to
UDP-Gal.

The term sialic acid is the name given to a group of more than 50 different
variations of the three parent compounds, _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac),
_N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), and KDN (mentioned above) as discussed
more fully in [Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/). Generation of
cytidine-5′-monophospho- _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid (CMP-Neu5Ac) is more
complicated than formation of the other activated sugars. First, UDP-GlcNAc is
converted to _N_ -acetylmannosamine-6-P by a single enzyme with two catalytic
activities. The first activity epimerizes the GlcNAc of UDP-GlcNAc at C-2 and
cleaves the UDP to yield _N_ -acetylmannosamine (ManNAc). In the next
reaction, the kinase activity uses ATP to form ManNAc-6-P. Mutations in this
enzyme cause two completely distinct metabolic disorders: sialuria and
inclusion body myopathy type 2 ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). Knocking
out this gene in mice causes early embryonic lethality. In the next step,
ManNAc-6-P is condensed with phosphoenolpyruvate to form _N_ -acetylneuraminic
acid-9-P. Phosphate is then removed by a phosphatase. Activation with CTP
yields CMP-Neu5Ac, which is the target for a hydroxylase that converts some of
it to CMP-Neu5Gc. The last steps occur in the nucleus with subsequent export
of the activated precursors to the cytoplasm. Other modifications of sialic
acid can occur in the Golgi after transfer of the sialic acid to the
oligosaccharide acceptor.

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) can be salvaged from
internal glycoprotein turnover or from plasma and activated by phosphorylation
and the addition of CMP from CTP. In addition, GlcNAc can be activated to UDP-
GlcNAc and reenter the biosynthetic pathway to CMP-Neu5Ac ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

Fucose is the only deoxyhexose commonly found in animal cell glycans. In
contrast, bacterial and plant polysaccharides and glycoproteins frequently
contain a variety of deoxysugars, deoxyaminosugars, and branched-chain sugars.
These diverse sugars often have potent biological properties. For example,
aminoglycoside antibiotics like streptomycin bind to the bacterial ribosome to
disrupt protein synthesis. Deoxyhexoses are often immunological determinants
of lipopolysaccharides or O-antigens of the _Salmonella_ species. Five of the
eight possible 3,6-dideoxyhexoses have been found in these organisms at the
nonreducing end of the Gram-negative cell wall lipopolysaccharide. Other
deoxyhexoses, such as a 4,6-dideoxy-hexose and a 2,3,6-trideoxyhexose, are
also biologically significant but so far seem to be uncommon in nature.

Biosynthesis of both deoxysugars and dideoxysugars begins with the oxidation
of C-4, similar to the first step of the conversion of GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc. The
nucleotide (N) differs for the various sugars, and the individual pathways use
different dehydratases. For example, biosynthesis of most 3,6-dideoxyhexoses
(except colitose) begins with conversion of CDP-glucose to
CDP-4-keto-6-deoxyhexose by NAD+-dependent CDP-glucose dehydratase. In the
biosynthesis of abequose (3,6-dideoxy-D-xylohexose), the product, CDP-6-deoxy-
L-threo-D-glycero-hexulose, is then converted in two additional steps to
CDP-3,6-dideoxy-D-glycero-D-glycero-4-hexulose by a second dehydratase
followed by a reductase.

Amino sugars, such as glucosamine, arise from keto sugars by the addition of
an amino group from glutamine ([Figure
5.1](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f1/?report=objectonly)). In addition,
bacteria and plants have many 6-deoxy-hexoses with amino groups in the 2, 3,
or 4 positions. For example, duanosamine is a 3-amino-6-deoxyhexose that is
found in the antibiotic duanomycin. Here, TDP-glucose is dehydrated to
3-keto-6-deoxyglucose and the amino group is added via a transamination
reaction probably involving a vitamin B6-dependent reaction.

Plants and bacteria also contain a number of branched-chain sugars. For
instance, apiose is a component of the polysaccharide apiogalacturonan of
_Lemna minor_ , and strepose is a component of the antibiotic streptomycin
produced by _Streptomyces griseus_. Apiose ([Figure
5.2](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f2/?report=objectonly)) is synthesized from
UDP-GlcA via a 4-keto intermediate that can yield UDP-Xyl or UDP-apiose.
Apiose synthesis removes carbon 3 from the chain to give the branched sugar by
an unknown mechanism. Although the synthesis of other branched-chain sugars
has not been delineated, they probably follow similar reaction pathways.

In eukaryotes, nucleotide sugars are synthesized in the cytoplasm or nucleus,
whereas most glycosylation occurs inside the ER or Golgi compartments
(exceptions being hyaluronan [[Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)] and
nucleocytoplasmic glycosylation [[Chapters 18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/) and
[19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)]). Therefore, newly synthesized nucleotide sugars
are on the “wrong” side of the membrane for most glycosylation reactions, and
so must be transported into the ER and Golgi. Negative charge prevents these
donors from simply diffusing into these compartments. To overcome this hurdle,
eukaryotic cells have a set of energy-independent nucleotide sugar antiporters
that deliver nucleotide sugars into the lumen of these organelles with the
simultaneous exiting of nucleoside monophosphates; most of which must first be
generated from the nucleoside diphosphates by a nucleoside diphosphatase
([Figure 5.4](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f4/?report=objectonly)). This
transport mechanism was determined biochemically in isolated vesicles and
genetically in various mutant cell lines. The Km of the transporters ranges
from 1 to 10 µm. Using in vitro systems, the transporters have been shown to
increase the concentration of the nucleotide sugars within the Golgi lumen by
10- to 50-fold. This is usually sufficient to reach or exceed the calculated
Km of glycosyltransferases that use these donors.

Most of these antiporters are found in the Golgi, but some are also found in
the ER. They are organelle-specific and their location usually corresponds to
the location of the relevant glycosyltransferases ([Table
5.2](/books/NBK453043/table/CH5TB2/?report=objectonly) and [Figure
5.4](/books/NBK453043/figure/ch5.f4/?report=objectonly)). Nucleotide sugar
imported into the Golgi is not energy-dependent or affected by ionophores.
However, the import is competitively inhibited by the corresponding nucleoside
monophosphates and diphosphates in the cytosol, but not by the
monosaccharides. There are also transporters for ATP and PAPS
(3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate), which are used for carbohydrate and
protein sulfation.

The glucuronidation of bile and xenobiotic compounds in the ER explains the
need for UDP-GlcA transporter in the ER. The presence of a Golgi transporter
is consistent with the location of the glycosyltransferases that use UDP-GlcA
for the formation of GAG chains and other classes of glycans. The observation
that reglycosylation of misfolded glycoproteins occurs in the ER ([Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)) explains the need for an ER UDP-Glc transporter.
Under stressful conditions that activate the unfolded protein response,
synthesis of lumenal uridine diphosphatase increases to accommodate increased
transport of UDP-Glc needed for reglucosylation of misfolded glycoproteins.
The existence of UDP-GlcNAc, UDP-GalNAc, and UDP-Xyl transporters in the ER
may mean that some reactions thought to occur exclusively in the Golgi may
also occur in the ER. A good example is the synthesis of O-fucosylated
proteins such as [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) in the ER versus
fucosylation of N- and O-linked chains in the Golgi ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). Other, as-yet-undiscovered, glycosylation
reactions may also occur in the ER.

Mutations in several nucleotide sugar transporters, UDP-Gal, CMP-Sia, GDP-Fuc,
UDP-GlcA/UDP-GalNAc, and UDP-GlcNAc cause human glycosylation disorders
([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)) generating incomplete sugar chains.
Mutant mammalian cell lines also lack specific nucleotide sugar transporters
(e.g., for UDP-Gal or CMP-Sia; [Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). However,
there is some “leakiness” in such mutants. For instance, loss of the UDP-Gal
transporter in the Golgi of mutant MDCK (Madin–Darby canine kidney) cells
decreases the synthesis of keratan sulfate and galactosylated glycoproteins
and glycolipids, but leaves heparan and chondroitin sulfate unaffected. This
is probably because the galactosyltransferases that synthesize the core region
tetrasaccharide common to GAG chains have lower Km values for their donors
([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

Many putative transporters were identified by homology in the genomes of
mammals, _Drosophila melanogaster_ ( _D. melanogaster_ ), _C. elegans_ ,
plants, and yeast. Like the plasma membrane GLUT transporters discussed above,
all are multimembrane-spanning (type III) proteins, but the level of amino
acid identity does not give any clue to the substrate specificity. The UDP-
GlcNAc transporters from mammalian cells and yeast are 22% identical, whereas
mammalian CMP-Sia, UDP-Gal, and UDP-GlcNAc transporters have 40%–50% identity.
Clever domain-swapping experiments show that distinct regions are responsible
for functional transport, and engineered chimeric transporters can carry both
CMP-Sia and UDP-Gal.

Heterologous expression or rescue of transporter-deficient cell lines can be
used to analyze the function of the putative transporters. For example,
expressing the _C. elegans_ gene _SQV-7_ in yeast showed that this one protein
transports UDP-GlcA, UDP-GalNAc, and UDP-Gal, whereas mutant alleles cannot
transport any of these donors. The human gene _SLC35B4_ encodes a bifunctional
transporter that recognizes UDP-Xyl and UDP-GlcNAc. Another example is the
GDP-Man transporter of _Leishmania_ that can also transport GDP-Fuc and GDP-
arabinose. This point illustrates that functional, biochemical analyses are
essential; genetic homology is insufficient to infer specificity. Moreover,
not all of the potential transport-like genes have been assigned a specific
substrate.

Theoretically, glycosylation may be controlled in part by regulating the
availability of nucleotide sugars within the Golgi, presumably by regulating
the transporters. The subcompartmental location ( _cis_ , medial, _trans_ ) of
the transporters in the Golgi is not known nor are the physical relationships
of the transporters to the various glycosyltransferases they service. Clearly,
a functional Golgi compartment requires both the nucleotide sugar donor and
the acceptor with a colocalized transferase. There have been few studies on
how the actual glycosylation reactions occur within the Golgi. Is it more like
solution chemistry or like solid-state transfers? Are there really “soluble
pools” of nucleotide sugars? Dramatic time-lapse videos of green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-tagged glycosyltransferases show that the proteins are highly
mobile within the Golgi, but there is also physical evidence for
multiglycosyltransferase complexes involved in the biosynthesis of N-linked
glycans, glycosphingolipids, and heparan sulfate. Many transporters appear to
function as homodimers, and the GDP-Man transporter in _Saccharomyces
cerevisiae_ ( _S. cerevisiae_ ) (VRG4) oligomerizes in the ER and appears to
be transported to the Golgi by an active process. Also, synthesis of
galactosylceramide occurs in the ER and a portion of the UDP-Gal transporter
binds specifically to galactosylceramide transferase and is retained in the ER
to provide donor substrate ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)).

Biochemical control of the intracellular concentrations of glycosylation
precursors (ultimately nucleotide sugars) is a complex and important area of
ongoing research. In some cases, key biosynthetic enzymes are inhibited by
their final products. A human genetic disorder called sialuria is a clear
example. In this condition, massive amounts of sialic acid (several grams each
day) are secreted into the urine along with various intermediates in the CMP-
Sia biosynthetic pathway. Sialuria is caused by mutations in the enzyme
responsible for the first step in sialic acid biosynthesis,
N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE). Sialuria-
causing mutations impair the normal feedback inhibition of GNE by CMP-Sia, the
end product of the precursor pathway ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

Most of the precursor pools turn over within a matter of minutes. The relevant
steady state concentrations of the nucleotide sugars have been difficult to
reliably determine. It is especially difficult to measure the concentrations
of nucleotide sugar donors at their sites of action, which are often confined
to the lumen of the ER or Golgi. In whole-animal studies, the GDP-Fuc pool and
fucosylated glycans in the intestine can be regulated by the diet and time of
weaning. Considering that resident bacteria in the small intestine participate
in the induction of fucosylation pathways in the enterocytes, and that gut
bacteria can release and use monosaccharides, dietary manipulation of
glycosylation introduces another level of unexplored complexity. The
relationship of amino acid and nucleotide metabolism to nucleotide sugar
metabolism is also potentially important but largely unexplored.

Glycans can be modified, imparting additional complexity and biological
information. Sulfation, phosphorylation, methylation, pyruvylation,
acetylation, and acylation have been found and their donors are listed in
[Table 5.3](/books/NBK453043/table/CH5TB3/?report=objectonly). In “lower”
eukaryotes and bacteria, pyruvic acid is often found as a 1-carboxyethylidene
bridge between two hydroxyl groups on a sugar such as galactose. Because all
of these reactions occur in the Golgi in eukaryotes, there must be carriers or
transporters that deliver and orient activated donors for efficient synthesis.
As additional modifications of sugar chains made in the ER–Golgi pathway are
uncovered, they will likely turn out to require specific transporters to carry
the activated donors into the lumen of these compartments.

Multiple glycosylation pathways in prokaryotes and eukaryotes require lipid
carriers to present monosaccharides and oligosaccharides at the proper
location. Undecaprenyl-P (bactoprenol) is the glycosyl carrier for O-antigen,
peptidoglycan, capsular polysaccharides, teichoic acid, and mannans in
bacteria ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)).
[Dolichol](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/dolichol/)-P serves the same function
in eukaryotic cells ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Dolichol-P-mannose
provides all of the mannose for glycophospholipid anchors, C-mannosylated
proteins, O-mannose-based chains, and four of the mannose residues of the
precursor oligosaccharide used for N-glycan biosynthesis. Dolichol-P-glucose
provides glucose for the mature N-linked glycan precursor Glc3Man9GlcNAc2,
which itself is built on dolichol pyrophosphate (dolichol-PP).

The formation of dolichol-P involves elongation of farnesyl pyrophosphate with
multiple _cis_ -isopentenyl pyrophosphate units. The total number of isoprene
units can vary from typically 11 in bacteria (making a C55 bactoprenol chain)
up to 21 in mammals. In eukaryotes, the double bond nearest the pyrophosphate
must be reduced for the carrier to be functional in glycosylation. Studies in
yeast, mice, and humans indicate that direct reduction of polyprenol to
dolichol is a major pathway, but an alternate pathway must also exist. It is
unclear whether the phosphates are removed before or after the reduction step.
The evolutionary significance of the different chain lengths and reduction of
the double bond is not known. [Dolichol](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/dolichol/) is phosphorylated by an ATP-dependent dolichol kinase to
generate dolichol-P as needed. Because dolichol, dolichol-P, and dolichol-PP
are all generated from a common metabolically stable pool, they must be
recycled and interconverted as needed. Dolichol occurs in the ER and Golgi and
turns over very slowly.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
the late Alan Elbein and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from
Vivek Kumar, Simone Kurz, and Jeremy Praissman.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.006

Glycosyltransferases and glycosidases are responsible for the assembly,
processing, and turnover of glycans. In addition, there are a number of
transferases that modify glycans by the addition of acetyl, methyl, phosphate,
sulfate, and other groups. This chapter covers the general characteristics of
enzymes involved in glycan initiation, assembly, and processing, including
aspects of substrate specificity, primary sequence relationships, structures,
and enzyme mechanisms.

The biosynthesis of glycans is primarily determined by glycosyltransferases
that assemble monosaccharide moieties into linear and branched glycan chains.
As might be expected from the complex array of glycan structures found in
nature, glycosyltransferases constitute a very large family of enzymes. In
many cases, they catalyze a group-transfer reaction in which the
monosaccharide moiety of a simple nucleotide sugar donor substrate (e.g., UDP-
Gal, GDP-Fuc, or CMP-Sia; [Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)) is transferred to
the acceptor substrate. In some instances, the donor substrates contain a
lipid moiety, such as dolichol-phosphate, linked to mannose or glucose. For
other glycosyltransferases, the donor substrate is dolichol-pyrophosphate
linked to an oligosaccharide, and in these cases the entire oligosaccharide is
transferred to the acceptor substrate ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)).
Other lipid-linked sugars serve as donor substrates for bacterial
glycosyltransferases involved in the assembly of peptidoglycan (e.g.,
undecaprenyl-pyrophosphoryl- _N_ -acetylmuramic acid-pentapeptide- _N_
-acetylglucosamine), lipopolysaccharide, and capsules ([Chapters
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)).

Glycosyltransferases that use monosaccharides, oligosaccharides, proteins,
lipids, small organic molecules, and DNA as acceptor substrates have been
characterized, but only glycosyltransferases involved in the biosynthesis of
glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycolipids are discussed in this chapter.
Among these enzymes, the vast majority is responsible for elongating the
glycan moiety of their acceptor substrates; the remainder catalyzes the
initial transfer of sugar to a polypeptide or lipid acceptor. Generally
speaking, the enzymes that elongate glycan chains act sequentially so that the
product of one enzyme yields a preferred acceptor substrate for the subsequent
action of another. The end result is a linear and/or branched structure
composed of monosaccharides linked to one another. Generally, acceptor
recognition does not involve the polypeptide or glycolipid moiety of the
acceptor substrate if present, although several notable exceptions exist as
described below.

Glycosidases that remove monosaccharides to form intermediates that are acted
on by glycosyltransferases are also involved in the biosynthesis of glycans.
Other glycosidases are involved in the degradation of glycans (e.g., in
lysosomes [[Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)]). In addition, glycans can be
modified by many other enzyme types, including sulfotransferases,
phosphotransferases, O-acetyl-transferases, O-methyltransferases,
pyruvyltransferases, and phosphoethanolamine transferases.

Most glycosyltransferases show a high degree of specificity for both their
donor and acceptor substrates, and this led Saul Roseman and coworkers to
advance the “one enzyme–one linkage” hypothesis. The human B blood group α1-3
galactosyltransferase exemplifies this concept. This enzyme catalyzes a
glycosylation reaction in which galactose is added in α-linkage to the C-3
hydroxyl group of a galactose residue on the acceptor substrate ([Figure
6.1](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f1/?report=objectonly)). However, the enzyme
only acts on galactose modified by fucose in α1-2-linkage. Prior modification
by other monosaccharides, such as α2-6-linked sialic acid, yields a glycan
that is not a substrate ([Figure
6.1](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f1/?report=objectonly)).

We now know that there are instances in which more than one
glycosyltransferase can use the same acceptor to make the same linkage. The
human fucosyltransferases III–VII, for example, all attach fucose in
α1-3-linkage to [_N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) moieties on glycans ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Other examples include the α2-3
sialyltransferases that act on β-linked galactose and the β1-4
galactosyltransferases that act on _N_ -acetylglucosamine. In some rare cases,
a single enzyme can catalyze more than one reaction. Human fucosyltransferase
III can attach fucose in either α1-3- or α1-4-linkage, and an enzyme called
EXTL2 can attach either _N_ -acetylgalactosamine or _N_ -acetylglucosamine in
α-linkage to glucuronic acid. The β1-4 galactosyltransferase involved in _N_
-acetyllactosamine formation shows an unusual flexibility in specificity. When
β1-4 galactosyltransferase binds α-lactalbumin (the complex is called lactose
synthase), it switches its acceptor specificity from _N_ -acetylglucosamine to
glucose, which enables lactose and other oligosaccharide synthesis during milk
formation ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Finally, some
glycosyltransferases have two separate active sites with different substrate
specificities. Those that synthesize the backbones of heparan sulfate
(EXT1/EXT2), for example, have one active site that catalyzes the attachment
of _N_ -acetylglucosamine to glucuronic acid and another that attaches
glucuronic acid to _N_ -acetylglucosamine ([Chapters
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/) and [17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). However, the
examples described above are all exceptions to the generally strict donor,
acceptor, and linkage specificity shown by most glycosyltransferases, a
property that serves to define and limit the number and type of glycan
structures observed in a given cell type or organism.

In contrast to those glycosyltransferases that elongate the glycan moiety of
their acceptor substrates, initiation of the biosynthesis of glycoproteins and
glycolipids involves glycosyltransferases that attach sugars to either a
polypeptide side chain or a sphingolipid base or glycerolipid. As might be
expected, these enzymes also show a high degree of specificity for their
substrates as will be discussed in more detail below for those that transfer
to polypeptide. Glycosyltransferases that initiate the synthesis of
glycosphingolipids transfer a monosaccharide moiety to what was originally a
serine residue in the ceramide lipid precursor of sphingolipids (see [Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Because different glycolipids have different
ceramide moieties, it appears that some glycosyltransferases, such as the
sialyltransferases, differentially recognize their substrates based on the
nature of the ceramide moiety.

The glycosyltransferases that transfer sugar directly to the polypeptide chain
of a protein or glycoprotein recognize their acceptor substrates in a number
of different ways. All eukaryotic N-glycans are initiated by
oligosaccharyltransferase, an ER-resident multi-subunit enzyme complex that
cotranslationally transfers the N-glycan precursor Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 to
asparagine residues in the sequence motif Asn-X-Ser/Thr (where X can be any
amino acid except proline; [Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). In contrast,
the polypeptide GalNAc transferases responsible for the initiation of mucin-
type O-glycans act after the protein has been folded and transported to the
Golgi ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). The polypeptide GalNAc
transferases do not recognize a specific sequence motif but some isoform
specificity has been noted. In general, they transfer GalNAc to the side
chains of serine and threonine residues found in relatively unstructured
regions of the folded protein. Some polypeptide O-GalNAc transferases possess
a lectin domain that serves to direct the glycosyltransferase to regions of
the polypeptide that already possess O-glycan chains. In this way, regions of
polypeptide that have a high degree of O-glycan substitution, typical of mucin
structures, can be synthesized.

In addition to the O-GalNAc linkage formed by the polypeptide GalNAc
transferases, a number of other glycosyltransferases can glycosylate the side
chains of serine and threonine residues to generate O-GlcNAc, O-fucose,
O-glucose, O-mannose, and O-xylose linkages ([Chapters
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/), [17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/), and
[19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Specificity for a particular serine or threonine
residue is achieved in different ways. The xylosyltransferase that _O_
-xylosylates a serine residue in chondroitin and heparan sulfate
proteoglycans, for example, has an absolute requirement for a glycine residue
located carboxy-terminally to the serine residue and the presence of acidic
residues in the vicinity of the glycosylation site. In contrast, the O-GlcNAc
transferase (OGT), responsible for adding GlcNAc to serine and threonine
residues on thousands of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)), lacks any obvious consensus sequence associated
with acceptor substrate binding specificity. For amino acid–consensus
sequences or glycosylation motifs used in the formation of glycopeptide bonds,
see [Table 6.1](/books/NBK453021/table/CH6TB1/?report=objectonly).

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident O-fucosyltransferases, POFUT1 and
POFUT2, that specifically fucosylate epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like
domains and thrombospondin type 1 repeats (TSRs), respectively ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)), differ fundamentally from most other
glycosyltransferases. In addition to recognizing a specific sequence motif
containing the target serine or threonine residue ([Table
6.1](/books/NBK453021/table/CH6TB1/?report=objectonly)), these enzymes only
act on EGF-like domains and TSRs that are properly folded and disulfide-
bonded. Glycosyltransferases that add O-glucose and O-GlcNAc to other serine
and threonine residues in the EGF-like domain also exist and these enzymes
also recognize a specific sequence motif and require a folded EGF-like domain.

A number of glycan elongating glycosyltransferases that act on glycoproteins
also recognize the polypeptide moiety of their acceptor substrates. The
glycoprotein hormone GalNAc transferase provides an interesting example in
which modification of an N-glycan is dependent on the presence of the protein
sequence motif Pro-X-Arg/Lys positioned several amino acids amino-terminally
to the N-glycan being modified. The motif is typically followed closely by
additional positively charged residues. The X-ray crystal structure of its
acceptor substrate, human chorionic gonadotropin, shows that the Pro-X-Arg/Lys
motif is at the beginning of a short surface-exposed helix that also contains
the additional positively charged residues ([Figure
6.2](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f2/?report=objectonly)). The _N_
-acetylgalactosamine residue transferred by this enzyme subsequently undergoes
a biologically important 4- _O_ -sulfation reaction that, in the case of
luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone, generates a determinant
recognized by specific liver clearance receptors that remove them from the
blood ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Glycosyltransferases that only
elongate the fucose moiety added by POFUT1 or POFUT2 also exist ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). The specificity shown by these enzymes stems from
their ability to recognize both the fucose moiety and the EGF-like and
[TSR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/thrombospondinrepeatstsr/) components of
their acceptor substrates. Additional examples of enzymes that elongate
glycans on specific glycoprotein substrates include the polysialyltransferases
specific for neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) and by EXTL3, an N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
that adds GlcNAc in α1-4-linkage to glucuronic acid in the first committed
step to heparan sulfate biosynthesis on proteoglycans ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

In a variation on this theme, GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase is able to
selectively modify the N-glycans found on a large family of lysosomal enzymes
that differ in three-dimensional structure and that lack any obvious and
common protein sequence motif. In this case, modification by this enzyme has
been shown to be dependent on lysine residues appropriately spaced and
positioned relative to the N-glycan site ([Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). The ER-resident glucosyltransferase, UGGT, is
also able to transfer sugar to the N-glycans on a diverse range of
glycoprotein substrates ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). In this case,
the enzyme adds a glucose moiety to the N-glycans on misfolded glycoproteins
rendering them substrates for the chaperones calnexin and calreticulin, which
in turn recruit ERp57, an enzyme involved in promoting proper disulfide bond
formation.

Approximately 1% of genes in the mammalian genome are involved in the
production or modification of glycans. Almost 200,000 glycosyltransferase
sequences are known across all kingdoms, and they comprise approximately 97
glycosyltransferase families as defined by primary sequence. These are
described in the [Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes ([CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/)) database
([Chapter 8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)). Although the absence of significant
sequence similarity between members of one family and another constitutes the
basis for this classification, short sequence motifs common to the members of
more than one family have been identified. These sequence elements are
typically found among glycosyltransferases with a given donor substrate
specificity; the sialyl motifs common to eukaryotic sialyltransferases are a
good example ([Figure
6.3](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f3/?report=objectonly)). Sequence motifs
common to galactosyltransferases, fucosyltransferases, and
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases have also been identified. In contrast, the
so-called “DXD” motif (Asp–any residue–Asp) is not associated with any
particular substrate specificity; this motif is involved in metal ion binding
and catalysis as discussed in more detail below.

Despite the large number of sequence families that have been defined,
structural analysis has shown that glycosyltransferases possess a limited
number of fold types. To date, structures for 41 members of the 97 families
have been determined by [X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/xraycrystallography/), and of these all but a few possess what have been
termed the GT-A or GT-B folds ([Figure
6.4](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f4/?report=objectonly)). The first
approximately 120 amino acids of the GT-A fold catalytic domain form a
structure similar to that termed the Rossmann fold, found in proteins that
bind nucleotides, and in the GT-A glycosyltransferases this region interacts
with the nucleotide sugar donor substrate. With only a few exceptions, the
GT-A enzymes have been found to possess a DXD motif and are metal-ion-
dependent glycosyltransferases. The enzymes containing a GT-B-fold possess two
distinct domains, and although the carboxy-terminal domain is primarily
responsible for binding the nucleotide sugar donor substrate, both domains
possess elements similar to the Rossmann fold. Unlike enzymes that contain the
GT-A fold, the GT-B glycosyltransferases are metal-ion-independent and do not
possess a DXD motif. All of the GT-A and GT-B glycosyltransferases use
nucleotide sugar donor substrates and, to date, the structures of only a few
enzymes that use lipid-linked sugar donors have been determined. Of these, two
are bacterial peptidoglycan glycosyltransferases shown to possess a lambda
lysozyme-like fold and two are prokaryotic N-glycan oligosaccharyltransferases
(PglB and AglB) that possess both an α-helical transmembrane region and a
mixed α/β-fold periplasmic domain ([Figure
6.4](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f4/?report=objectonly)). PglB and AglB have
been classified as GT-C glycosyltransferases and because they are
evolutionarily related to the core subunit of the eukaryotic
oligosaccharyltransferase, they provide a model for how it cotranslationally
mediates N-glycosylation in eukaryotes.

Glycosyltransferases catalyze their reactions with either inversion or
retention of stereochemistry at the anomeric carbon atom of the donor
substrate ([Figure 6.5](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f5/?report=objectonly)).
For example, β1-4 galactosyltransferase, an inverting glycosyltransferase,
transfers galactose from UDP-α-Gal to generate a β1-4-linked galactose-
containing product. Inversion of stereochemistry follows from the fact that
the enzyme uses an SN2 ( _s_ ubstitution nucleophilic bimolecular) reaction
mechanism in which an acceptor hydroxyl group attacks the anomeric carbon atom
of UDP-Gal from one side and UDP leaves from the other ([Figure
6.5A](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f5/?report=objectonly)). Typically, enzymes
of this type possess an aspartate or glutamate residue whose side chain serves
to partially deprotonate the incoming acceptor hydroxyl group, rendering it a
better nucleophile (as shown in [Figure
6.6](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f6/?report=objectonly) for the β1-4
galactosyltransferase). In addition, these enzymes possess features that help
to promote leaving-group departure. In the GT-A enzymes, a metal ion, bound by
the DXD motif, is typically positioned to interact with the diphosphate
moiety. The positively charged metal ion serves to electrostatically stabilize
the additional negative charge that develops on the terminal phosphate moiety
of the UDP leaving group during breakage of the sugar-phosphate bond of the
donor substrate ([Figure
6.6](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f6/?report=objectonly)). In one of the GT-A
enzymes that is not metal-ion-dependent, positively charged side chains
stabilize the leaving group, a strategy also used by some of the GT-B-fold
enzymes.

Although the mechanism used by retaining glycosyltransferases is not well
understood, insight into how they might work is provided by our knowledge of
glycosidase mechanism. On the basis of much structural and enzyme kinetic
analysis, it is well established that inverting glycosidases proceed via a
single SN2 displacement mechanism ([Figure
6.5a](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f5/?report=objectonly)), whereas retaining
glycosidases use a double displacement mechanism involving a covalent
glycosyl-enzyme intermediate ([Figure
6.5b](/books/NBK453021/figure/ch6.f5/?report=objectonly)). In the double
displacement mechanism, an aspartic acid or glutamic acid side chain in the
enzyme active site makes the first attack and inversion, followed by a second
water-mediated attack (on the glycosyl-enzyme intermediate) and inversion, to
give overall retention of stereochemistry. In fact, using mechanism-based
inhibitors, the glycosyl-enzyme intermediate has been trapped and studied by
[X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/xraycrystallography/) for
a number of glycosidases. However, similar attempts to trap and study
glycosyltransferase reaction intermediates have not yet been successful. An
alternate mechanism, also proposed for glycogen phosphorylase, is that of the
SNi mechanism. In this case, the incoming nucleophile attacks from the same
side as the leaving group, leading to retention of configuration.

Many glycosyltransferases have been shown to possess a Bi Bi sequential
kinetic mechanism in which the donor substrate binds before the acceptor
substrate, and the glycosylated acceptor is released before the nucleoside
monosphosphate or disphosphate, depending on the reaction. Such kinetics are
readily explained by a structural model in which the active site represents a
deep pocket, with the nucleotide sugar substrate at the bottom and the
acceptor substrate stacked on top. If the acceptor substrate was to bind
first, it would sterically preclude donor substrate binding and, as such,
catalysis would not occur. Because of the stacked arrangement, it also follows
that release of the glycosylated product must precede release of the
nucleoside phosphate. Although largely consistent with such a model, the X-ray
crystal structures of glycosyltransferase-substrate complexes also show that
substrate-dependent ordering of flexible loops is a feature common to
glycosyltransferases. Typically, donor substrate binding orders a loop(s) that
in turn facilitates acceptor substrate binding. Moreover, loop ordering almost
certainly serves to exclude bulk water from the active site, a strategy used
by most enzymes to create an active site environment that reduces the energy
of the transition state and promotes catalysis.

Glycosidases are a very large family of enzymes with 135 members currently
listed in the [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) database ([Chapter
8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)). Unlike the glycosyltransferases, however, members
of this family have evolved independently many times, a fact reflected in the
diverse array of three-dimensional structures observed for these enzymes.
Glycosidases play important roles in the degradation of glycan structures for
uptake and metabolism of sugars and for the turnover of glycoconjugates in
various cellular processes. Glycosidases are also involved in the formation of
intermediates that are used as substrates for glycosyltransferases in the
biosynthesis of glycans. The use of glycosidases in this way is particularly
important in the biosynthesis of N-glycan containing glycoproteins in “higher”
eukaryotes and is thought to be associated with the acquisition of complex
N-glycans during the evolution of multicellular organisms. In this case, the
nascent glycoprotein glycan, Glc3Man9GlcNAc2-Asn, is trimmed by glucosidases
and mannosidases in the ER and Golgi to generate substrates for the
glycosyltransferases that lead to complex and hybrid-type N-glycans ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Glucosidase II, one of the two ER-resident
glucosidases involved, also works in conjunction with UGGT during glycoprotein
folding to allow repeated deglucosylation/reglucosylation during what has been
termed the calnexin/calreticulin quality control cycle ([Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). An interplay between glycosylation and
deglycosylation is also found to occur with the O-GlcNAc moiety found on many
nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins (transferred by O-GlcNAc transferase;
[Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). In this case, removal of the GlcNAc
moiety by the glycosidase, O-GlcNAcase, provides a means of dynamically
regulating the extent of [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/oglcnacylation/) and the diverse processes that it mediates.

The sulfotransferases are a large family of enzymes found in both the
cytoplasm and the Golgi. Sulfotransferases play a particularly important role
in the production of glycosaminoglycans ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/))
and the formation of L-selectin ligands, glycans required for the trafficking
of lymphocytes across high-endothelial venules in lymph nodes ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). All sulfotransferases use 3′-phospho-
adenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) as the sulfate donor ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). Although the sequence similarity among
sulfotransferases can be very low, they all possess conserved sequence motifs
responsible for binding the 5′ and 3′ phosphate groups of PAPS. Moreover,
structural analysis has shown that all of the sulfotransferases solved, to
date, possess the same basic structure. Mechanistically, the enzyme proceeds
via an SN2-like reaction, with the hydroxyl group of the acceptor making an
in-line attack on the sulfate group. Structural studies and mutagenesis have
shown that a histidine residue serves to activate the hydroxyl nucleophile and
a lysine assists in stabilizing the PAP leaving group. Interestingly, a
conserved serine residue seems to be involved in modulating the activity of
these enzymes to prevent PAPS hydrolysis in the absence of acceptor substrate.

Phosphorylation of sugar residues by ATP-dependent kinases occurs at C-2 of
_O_ -xylose in proteoglycans ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) and at the
C-6 position of _O_ -mannose in α-dystroglycan after the mannose has been
further glycosylated ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)).
Phosphoglycosylation, a process in which a sugar phosphate is transferred from
a nucleotide sugar donor directly to a serine residue on a protein (e.g.,
GlcNAc-P-serine), occurs in _Dictyostelium_. In eukaryotic cells,
mannose-6-phosphate on the N-glycans of lysosomal enzymes occurs by a two-step
process involving UDP-GlcNAc as the phosphate donor. In the first step,
GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase uses UDP-GlcNAc to generate
GlcNAcα1-P-6-Manα1-(N-glycan), and in the second step the GlcNAc moiety is
removed by a second enzyme to give P-6-Manα1-(N-glycan) ([Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)).

_O_ -Acetylation occurs in bacteria and in the modification of sialic acids,
but little information is available on the chemistry of these reactions. _N_
-Deacetylation of GlcNAc residues occurs during heparin/heparan sulfate
formation ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), lipopolysaccharide assembly
([Chapters 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)), and
GPI-anchor synthesis ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). The bacterial
enzyme is zinc-dependent, but in-depth studies of the vertebrate
N-deacetylases have not been performed. _N_ -Deacetylation of _N_
-acetylneuraminic acid (the most common sialic acid) has also been reported
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

Finally, glycans can be modified in many other ways, including pyruvylation
(e.g., in the formation of _N_ -acetylmuramic acid; [Chapters
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)), the addition of
ethanolamine phosphate (e.g., during GPI-anchor synthesis; [Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)), and alkylation, deoxygenation, and halogenation
in microbial glycans. All of these reactions are catalyzed by unique
transferases or oxidoreductases and represent areas of active research.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Lei Feng, Tetsuya
Hirata, and Christopher Saeui.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.007

This chapter provides an overview of the biological functions of glycans in
three broad categories: structural and modulatory roles, including nutrient
storage and sequestration; specific recognition—most commonly by glycan-
binding proteins of intrinsic or extrinsic origin; and molecular mimicry of
host glycans. The chapter then presents some general principles for
understanding and further exploring biological functions of glycans. For
details, see the sources cited and the other chapters in this book.

As with other major macromolecules, the biological functions of glycans span
the spectrum from relatively subtle to crucial for development, growth,
maintenance, or survival of the organism that synthesizes them. For many
glycans, a function is not yet evident. The same glycan may also have
different functions depending on which aglycone it is attached. Over the
years, many theories have been advanced regarding biological roles of glycans.
Although there is evidence to support all the theories, exceptions to each can
also be found. This should not be surprising, given the abundance and enormous
diversity of glycans in nature. Complexities also arise because glycans are
frequently bound by microbes and microbial toxins, making them a liability to
the organism that synthesizes them.

Biological functions of glycans can be divided into three broad categories:
(1) structural and modulatory properties, including nutrient storage and
sequestration; (2) specific recognition by other molecules—most commonly,
glycan-binding proteins (GBPs); and (3) molecular mimicry of host glycans
([Figure 7.1](/books/NBK453034/figure/ch7.f1/?report=objectonly)). The GBPs
can be subdivided into two groups: (1) intrinsic GBPs, which recognize glycans
from the same organism and (2) extrinsic GBPs, which recognize glycans from
another organism. Intrinsic GBPs typically mediate cell–cell interactions or
recognize extracellular molecules, but they can also recognize glycans on the
same cell. Extrinsic GBPs comprise pathogenic microbial adhesins, agglutinins,
or toxins, but some also mediate symbiotic relationships or host defense
directed at microbial glycans. Intrinsic and extrinsic glycan recognition
likely act as opposing selective forces driving and constraining evolutionary
change ([Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)), at least partly accounting for
the enormous diversity of glycans in nature. Microbial pathogens engage in
“molecular mimicry,” evading immune reactions by decorating themselves with
glycans typical of their hosts, and also in “glycan gimmickry” for modulating
host immunity toward increased tolerance. Finally, most microbes are
themselves targets of pathogens (e.g., bacteriophages that invade bacteria),
and glycan recognition is a common feature of these interactions as well.

Other general principles emerge based on existing literature. The biological
consequences of experimentally altering glycosylation in various systems seem
to be highly variable and unpredictable. A given glycan can have different
roles in different tissues, at different times in development (organism-
intrinsic functions) or in different environmental contexts (organism-
extrinsic functions). As a broad generalization, it can be stated that
terminal sequences, unusual structures, and modifications of glycans are
thought to mediate the more specific biological functions within the organism.
However, such glycans or their modifications are also more likely to be
targets for pathogens and toxins. Perhaps as a consequence, intra- and
interspecies variations in glycosylation are relatively common, and at least
some of the diversity of glycans in nature may represent signatures of past or
current host–pathogen interactions ([Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)).
Finally, genetic defects in glycosylation are easily obtained in cultured
cells, but they often have limited biological consequences in vitro. In
contrast, the same defects can have major and even catastrophic consequences
in whole organisms. This indicates that many major functions of glycans are
operative mainly within an intact, multicellular organism. Some of these
principles are briefly discussed below.

Approaches to understand biological roles of glycans include prevention of
initial glycosylation, prevention of glycan chain elongation, alteration of
glycan processing, enzymatic or chemical deglycosylation of completed chains,
genetic elimination of glycosylation sites, addition of unnatural
monosaccharides, and studies of mutant and naturally occurring genetic
variants in glycosylation enzymes. Consequences of such manipulations range
from being essentially undetectable to the complete loss of particular
functions or even loss of the entire glycoconjugate bearing the altered
glycan. Even within a particular class of molecules (e.g., cell-surface
receptors), the effects of altering glycosylation are variable and
unpredictable. Moreover, the same glycosylation change can have markedly
different effects in different cell types or when studied in vivo or in vitro.
The effect may depend on the structure of the glycan, the biological context,
and the specific biological function. Given all of the above considerations,
it is difficult to predict the functions that a given glycan on a given
glycoconjugate might mediate, and its relative importance to the organism.

Glycans have many protective, stabilizing, organizational, and barrier
functions. The glycocalyx that covers all eukaryotic cells and the
polysaccharide coats of various prokaryotes represent a substantial physical
barrier. [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) constituents of matrix
molecules, such as proteoglycans, are important for maintenance of tissue
structure, porosity, and integrity. Such molecules can also contain binding
sites for other specific glycans, which in turn, aid overall matrix
organization. The external location of glycans on most glycoproteins can
provide a general shield, protecting the underlying polypeptide from
recognition by proteases, blocking antibody binding, and even (in the case of
mucins) protecting entire tissue surfaces from microbial attachment. Glycans
are also involved in folding of newly synthesized polypeptides in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and/or in the subsequent maintenance of protein
solubility and conformation ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). Indeed, if
some proteins are incorrectly glycosylated, these fail to fold properly and/or
to exit the ER and are subsequently consigned to degradation in proteasomes.
Conversely, there are examples of glycoproteins whose synthesis, folding,
trafficking, sensitivity to proteolysis, or immune recognition seem unaffected
by altering their glycosylation. Moreover, inhibitors ([Chapter
55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)) or genetic mutations ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)) that only affect later steps of glycan processing
often do not interfere with basic structural functions. Although structural
functions of glycans are obviously of great importance to the intact organism,
they do not explain the evolution of such a diverse and complex range of
molecules.

[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) can also modulate
interactions of proteins with one another. Some growth factor receptors
acquire their binding abilities in a glycosylation-dependent manner while in
transit through the Golgi apparatus. This may limit unwanted early
interactions of a newly synthesized receptor with a growth factor that is
synthesized in the same cell. Glycosylation of a polypeptide can also mediate
an on-off switching effect. For example, when the hormone β-human chorionic
gonadotrophin is deglycosylated, it still binds to its receptor with similar
affinity, but it fails to stimulate adenylate cyclase. In most instances, the
effects of glycosylation are incomplete; that is, glycosylation appears to be
“tuning” a primary function of the protein rather than turning it on or off.
For example, the activity of some glycosylated growth factors and hormones can
be modulated over a wide range by the extent and type of their glycosylation.
This becomes particularly evident when recombinant glycoprotein molecules are
produced in biotechnology, bearing different glycosylation patterns based on
the evolutionary history of the cell expression system in use.

The intricate modulation of [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/notch/)–ligand interactions by the [Fringe](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/fringe/) glycosyltransferase, whereby _cis_ and _trans_ ligand
interactions are tuned, is a prime example of such phenomena ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). Another striking example is the role of
polysialic acid (polySia) chains on the neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM).
This adhesion receptor normally mediates homophilic binding between neuronal
cells. In the embryonic state, or in other states of neural “plasticity,”
polySia chains tend to be long, thereby interfering with homophilic binding
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). There are also instances wherein
functions can be tuned by glycans attached to other neighboring structures.
For example, polySias of embryonic NCAM can interfere with the interactions of
other unrelated receptor–ligand pairs, simply by physically separating the
cells. Also, tyrosine phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) and
the insulin receptors can be modulated by endogenous cell-surface
gangliosides, possibly by organizing them into membrane microdomains ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Although the precise mechanisms of the latter
effects are uncertain, specificity is implied by the requirement for a defined
glycan sequence on the ganglioside. Because most of such tuning effects of
glycans are partial, their overall importance tends to be questioned. However,
the sum total of several such partial effects can result in a dramatic effect
on the final biological outcome. Thus, glycosylation appears to be a mechanism
for generating important functional diversity from the limited set of basic
receptor–ligand interactions that are possible, when using gene products from
a typical genome. Of course, as with most other glycan functions, exceptions
can be found. There are many receptors whose ligand binding is independent of
glycosylation and many peptide ligands whose binding and action are not
obviously affected by glycosylation.

Another structural/modulatory function of glycans is to act as a protective
storage depot for biologically important molecules. For example, many heparin-
binding growth factors ([Chapters 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/) and
[38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)) bind glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains of the
extracellular matrix, adjacent to cells that need to be stimulated (e.g., in
the basement membrane underlying epithelial and endothelial cells). This
prevents diffusion of factors away from the site (sometimes generating
morphogenic gradients), protects them from nonspecific proteolysis, prolongs
their active lives, and allows them to be released under specific conditions.
Likewise, GAG chains in secretory granules can bind and protect protein
contents of the granule and modulate their functions. There are several other
instances in which glycans act as sinks or depots for biologically important
molecules, such as water, ions, and immune regulatory proteins. The asymmetry
in localization of most glycans on the outer plasma membrane leaflet can
contribute to a signal for the rupture of vesicles, in which exposed glycans
are detected by cytoplasmic lectins (e.g., galectins) and trigger autophagy.

Last but not least, polymerized glycans such as starch and cellulose (in
plants) and glycogen (in animals) can serve a major role in nutrient storage
and sequestration. The relative resistance to digestibility of the internal
linkages of such polymers by enzymes of intrinsic or extrinsic origin
determines their relative role as structural components or as a mechanism for
nutrient sequestration.

The first intrinsic glycan receptors identified in vertebrates were those
mediating clearance, turnover, and intracellular trafficking of soluble blood-
plasma glycoproteins ([Chapters
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)–[34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), specifically
recognizing certain terminal or subterminal glycans on the glycoprotein.
However, even the most precise examples, such as the role of
mannose-6-phosphate (Man-6-P) in the trafficking of lysosomal enzymes to
lysosomes ([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)), feature exceptions. For
instance, Man-6-phosphorylation is not absolutely required for trafficking of
lysosomal enzymes in certain cell types, nor is it operative in some “lower”
eukaryotes. There are also endocytic receptors recognizing specific glycan
sequences, whose functions have yet to be assigned. Several instances exist
wherein free glycans can have hormonal actions that induce specific responses
in a highly structure-specific manner. Examples include interaction of small
glycans (lipochitooligosaccharides) from bacterial and fungal symbionts with
plant roots ([Chapter 40](/books/n/glyco3/ch40/)) and bioactive properties of
hyaluronan fragments in mammalian systems ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)), both of which induce biological responses in a
size- and structure-dependent manner. Likewise, free heparan or dermatan
sulfate fragments released by certain cell types can have biological effects
in situations such as wound healing. In many of these instances, the putative
receptors for these molecules and their precise mechanisms are still being
defined.

It is now clear that glycans have many specific biological roles in cell–cell
recognition and cell–matrix interactions. A well characterized example is the
selectin family of adhesion molecules, which recognize glycans on ligands and
mediate critical interactions between blood cells and vascular cells in a
variety of normal and pathological situations ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Glycans and GBPs on cell surfaces can interact
specifically with molecules in the matrix or even with glycans on the same
cell surface. Some critical recognition sites are actually combinations of
glycans and protein. For example, P-selectin recognizes the generic selectin
ligand sialyl Lewis x with high affinity only in the context of the amino-
terminal 13 amino acids of P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1), which
include required sulfated tyrosine residues ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycan/)-binding sites of cell-surface receptors like
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) can be masked by cognate
glycans on the same cell surface, making them unavailable for recognition of
external ligands ([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). On the other hand,
some glycans can act as “biological masks,” preventing recognition of
underlying residues (e.g., sialic acids can mask recognition of underlying
β-galactosides by galectins or other GBPs).

[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/)–carbohydrate
interactions can also have specific biological roles in cell–cell
interactions. A dramatic example is the species-specific interaction between
marine sponges, mediated via homotypic binding of glycans on a large cell-
surface glycoprotein. Another example is the compaction of the mouse embryo at
the morula stage, which seems to be facilitated by a Lewis x–Lewis x
interaction. The single-site affinities of such interactions are not strong
and sometimes difficult to measure. However, if the molecules are present in
very high copy numbers on the cell surface, a large number of relatively low-
affinity interactions can collaborate to produce a high-avidity “Velcro”
effect that is sufficient to mediate biologically relevant interactions.

Many glycans are specifically bound by various viruses, bacteria, and
parasites, and also targeted by many toxins ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Given rapid evolution of pathogens and ongoing
selection, there is typically excellent recognition specificity for the
sequence of the glycans involved. For example, the hemagglutinins of many
viruses specifically recognize the type of host sialic acid, its
modifications, and its linkage to the underlying sugar chain. Likewise,
various toxins bind with great specificity to certain gangliosides but not to
related structures ([Chapters 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/) and
[37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). There is little doubt about the importance of
structural specificity with respect to these functions of glycans. Indeed,
many of the microbial binding proteins involved have been harnessed as
molecular probes for studying the expression of their cognate glycans.
However, providing signposts to aid the success of pathogenic microorganisms
has little obvious value to the organism that synthesized such glycans. To
counter such deleterious consequences, some organisms have also evolved the
ability to mask or modify glycans recognized by microorganisms or toxins.
Meanwhile, glycan sequences on soluble glycoconjugates, such as secreted
mucins, act as decoys for microorganisms and parasites. Thus, a pathogenic
organism or toxin evolving to bind to mucosal cell membranes may first
encounter its cognate ligand attached to a soluble mucin, which can then be
washed away, removing the danger to cells underneath. In contrast, instances
occur in which symbiosis is mediated by specific glycan recognition, such as
some commensal bacteria in the gut lumen of animals and the bacteria involved
in forming plant root nodules in nitrogen fixing legumes or mycorrhizal
symbioses between trees and fungi ([Chapter 40](/books/n/glyco3/ch40/)). Last
but not least, many pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) often
consist of foreign glycans and/or glycan patterns on invading microbes are
recognized by innate immune cells, and are detected by specific receptors such
as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and C-type lectins ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).

Pathogens that invade multicellular animals sometimes decorate themselves with
glycan structures that are identical or nearly identical to those on host cell
surfaces ([Chapters 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/) and
[43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)). Such glycans block recognition of underlying
antigenic epitopes, restrict immune cell complement system activation, and can
also mimic “self-associated molecular patterns” (SAMPs) of hosts, all of which
are successful strategies for evading host immune responses. Perhaps not
surprisingly, pathogens have evolved this state of molecular mimicry by making
use of “every possible trick in the book,” including direct or indirect
appropriation of host glycans, convergent evolution toward similar
biosynthetic pathways, and even lateral gene transfer. In some instances, the
impact of the pathogen is aggravated by autoimmune reactions, resulting from
host reactions to these self-like antigens. Pathogens and parasites also
engage in glycogimmickry—for example, gut symbionts induce tolerogenic states
by the gut immunity using pentasaccharide called polysaccharide A, and
helminthic parasites have evolved countless ways to modulate the immune
response of their hosts using specific immunomodulatory glycans. Secreted and
soluble milk oligosaccharides (all extensions of the disaccharide lactose) of
mammals provide an example of glycan manipulation of microbial symbionts or
pathogens in the infant by maternal glycans. These glycans have potent effects
by favoring symbionts and blocking pathogenic microbes (bacteria and viruses)
of the infant gut.

Expression of certain glycans on different glycoconjugates in different
tissues at different stages of development implies diverse roles for these
glycan structures within the same organism. For example, Man-6-P-containing
glycans were first found on lysosomal enzymes and are involved in lysosomal
trafficking ([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). However, such glycans are
now known to occur on a variety of apparently unrelated proteins, for
different functional roles. Likewise, the sialylated fucosylated lactosamines
critical for selectin recognition ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)) are
found in a variety of unrelated cell types in mammals, and the polySia chains
that play an important part in embryonic nervous system neural cell adhesion
molecule (NCAM) function ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) are also found
on a G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR) (CCR7) expressed in dendritic cells
where they appear to be important for targeting of these cells to the lymph
nodes. Given that glycans are added posttranslationally, these observations
should not be surprising. Once a new glycan or modification has been expressed
in an organism, several distinct functions could evolve independently in
different tissues and at different times in development. If any of these
situations mediated a function valuable to survival and reproduction, the
genetic mechanisms responsible for expression of the glycan and its expression
pattern would remain conserved in evolution. A further example of dual roles
is the use of fragments of structural glycans as danger or damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs) by the immune systems of multicellular organisms.
Examples include cell wall fragments in plants and hyaluronan fragments in
vertebrates.

The underlying core structures of major glycan classes tend to be conserved
across many species; for example, the core structure of N-glycans is conserved
across all eukaryotes and at least some Archaea ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). However, there can be considerable diversity in
outer-chain glycosylation, even among relatively similar species. Such
interspecies variation in glycan structure indicates that some glycan
sequences do not have fundamental and universal roles in all tissues and cell
types in which they are expressed. Of course, such diversity could be involved
in generating differences in morphology and function observed between species.
Such variations could also reflect the outcome of differing selection
pressures by exposure to variant pathogen regimes. Furthermore, significant
intraspecies polymorphism in glycan structure can exist without obvious
functional value, although they may be involved in the interplay between
parasites and host populations ([Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)).

Given all of the above, it is challenging to predict which glycan structures
are likely to mediate the more specific or crucial biological roles within an
organism. As mentioned above, terminal sugar sequences, unusual structures, or
modifications of glycans are more likely to be involved in such specific
roles. The predictive value of this observation is reduced by the fact that
such entities are also more likely to be involved in interactions with
microorganisms and other potentially noxious agents. Further complexity arises
from “microheterogeneity” in glycan structure ([Chapter
20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)), wherein the same glycosylation site on the same
protein in the same species can carry a variety of related glycan structures
or none at all. The challenge then is to predict and sort out which distinct
roles can be assigned to a given glycan structure in a given cell type and
organism. In the coevolutionary arms race between pathogens and hosts,
pathogens will tend to exploit glycans that are difficult for the host to
change (those with host intrinsic function), and because hosts are unable to
alter their glycans easily owing to their slower evolutionary rates and
functional constraints of existing glycans, the extrinsic and intrinsic
functions of these glycans are bound to overlap. Hosts can, however, to the
degree possible, be expected to evolve glycans that are difficult for microbes
to mimic, such as the vertebrate-specific sialic acid Neu5Gc ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) and sulfated GAGs, which prokaryotes do seem to
have reinvented ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

Because microorganisms and parasites that bind glycans evolve in parallel with
their multicellular hosts, they must adapt their glycan-binding “repertoire”
to any change in glycan structure presented by the host. In response, the host
population may select for new modifications of the target structure,
especially if the latter had meanwhile evolved a vital function elsewhere
within the organism. Thus, there would be no choice but to preserve the
underlying scaffolding on which the latest modification was placed, while
adding yet another layer of complexity to its glycans. Such cycles of
evolutionary interaction between microbes and hosts might explain some of the
complex and extended sugar chains found in multicellular organisms, especially
in areas of frequent microbial contact, such as in secreted mucins on mucosal
surfaces. In this manner, “junk” glycans could accumulate, akin to “junk” DNA.
An important distinction is that much of the junk DNA consists of selfish DNA
elements capable of replicating, whereas glycans cannot encode additional
copies of themselves, given that their synthesis relies on the activity of a
coordinated network of gene products. Although such structures may still
function as structural scaffolding, they may have no other specific role in a
particular cell type at that particular time in evolution. They would, of
course, provide fodder for future evolutionary selection, either for new
organism-intrinsic functions or selective responses to a new pathogen.
Additionally, neutral drift (which is now acknowledged as a major process in
evolution) may explain some of the apparent “junk” glycans. The
microheterogeneity inherent in glycan synthesis process may be producing
“neutral noise,” but this noise may also contribute to evolutionary
flexibility.

Some functions of glycans are discovered serendipitously. In other instances,
the investigator who has elucidated complete details of the structure and
biosynthesis of a specific glycan is left without knowing its functions. It is
necessary to design experiments that can differentiate between trivial and
crucial functions mediated by each glycan. Various approaches are discussed
below, emphasizing the advantages and disadvantages of each approach (also
presented in schematic form in [Figure
7.2](/books/NBK453034/figure/ch7.f2/?report=objectonly)).

Many current approaches to understanding glycan diversity ([Chapters
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/) and [51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)) involve extraction
and identification of the entire complement of glycans found in a given organ
or tissue, without regard to the fact that individual cell types and even
basal versus apical sides of the same cell can have widely varying glycan
expression patterns. However, cell type–specific localization of glycans can
be explored using highly specific GRPs (GBPs or antibodies, see [Chapter
48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)). Once a specific glycan has been localized in an
interesting biological context, it is natural to consider introducing the
cognate GRP into the intact system, hoping to interfere with a specific
function and generate an interpretable phenotype. Such an approach is likely
to give confusing results with regard to glycan function. Some GRPs (e.g.,
antibodies against glycans) tend to have weak affinity and show cross-
reactivity. Although some plant lectins seem very specific for animal glycans,
they originate from organisms that typically do not contain the same ligand.
Thus, their apparent specificity may not be as reliable when introducing them
into complex animal biological systems where they might bind unknown cross-
reacting glycans. Finally, most GRPs are multivalent, and their cognate
ligands (the glycans) tend to be present in multiple copies on multiple
glycoconjugates. Thus, introduction of a GRP into a complex biological system
may cause nonspecific aggregation of various molecules and cell types, and the
effects seen may extend well beyond the biological functions of the glycan in
question. It would seem worthwhile to develop recombinant monovalent GRP
modules that are derived from the same system being investigated, provided
they are of high enough affinity. Effects of introducing such monovalent GRPs
as competitors of the native function may yield more interpretable clues.

Many pharmacological agents can metabolically inhibit or alter glycosylation
in intact cells and animals ([Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). Although
such agents are powerful tools to elucidate biosynthetic pathways, they can
yield confusing results in complex systems. One concern is that an inhibitor
may have effects on other unrelated pathways. For example, the inhibitor
tunicamycin that blocks N-linked glycosylation can also cause ER stress and
inhibit UDP-Gal uptake into the Golgi. The second concern is that the
inhibitor may cause such global changes in glycan synthesis that the physical
properties of the glycoconjugates and/or membranes are altered, making it
difficult to interpret the results. Somewhat more useful results can be
obtained by introducing low-molecular-weight primers of terminal glycosylation
([Chapter 55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)), which can act as alternate substrates
for Golgi enzymes, diverting synthesis away from the endogenous glycoproteins.
However, this approach can simultaneously generate incomplete glycans on
endogenous glycoconjugates, as well as produce secreted glycan chains, each of
which could have its own biological effects.

Because specific “carbohydrate-recognition domains” can be identified within a
primary amino acid sequence ([Chapters 28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/) and
[29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)), it is now possible to predict whether a newly
cloned protein can bind glycans. If a potential GBP can be produced in
sufficient quantities, techniques such as hemagglutination, flow cytometry,
surface plasmon resonance, and affinity chromatography ([Chapters
29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/) and [28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)) can then be used
to search for specific ligands. However, the monovalent affinity of the
putative GBP for its ligand may not be high. Thus, high densities and/or
multivalent arrays may be needed to avoid missing a biologically relevant
interaction. The question also arises as to where exactly to look for the
biologically relevant ligands in a complex multicellular system. Furthermore,
because many glycan structures can be expressed in different tissues at
different times in development and growth, a recombinant GBP may detect a
cognate structure in a location and at a time that it is not of major
biological relevance. Careful consideration of the natural occurrence and
expression profile of the GBPs should lead to a rational decision as to where
to look for its biologically relevant glycan ligands.

The converse situation arises when an unusual glycan is found to be expressed
in an interesting context and is hypothesized to be a ligand for a specific
receptor. It is possible to search for such a receptor by techniques similar
to those above, such as hemagglutination, flow cytometry, and affinity
chromatography ([Chapters 28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/) and
[29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)). To facilitate the search, it is necessary to
have reasonable quantities of the pure defined glycan in question, as well as
a variety of closely related structures as negative controls. Because many
biologically relevant lectin-like interactions are of low affinity, it is
probably advisable to use a multivalent form of the glycan as the probe
(bait). Finally, it may not be obvious where to look for the glycan-binding
protein. For example, the receptor that recognizes the unusual sulfated
N-glycans of pituitary glycoprotein hormones was eventually found not in the
pituitary nor in any of the target tissues for these hormones, but in liver
endothelial cells, wherein it regulates the circulating half-life of the
hormones ([Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)). Indeed, the most biologically
relevant receptor for a particular glycan might even be found in another
organism (a pathogen, a symbiont, or a mate).

The addition of soluble glycans or structural mimics into a system can block
the interaction between an endogenous GBP and a specific glycan ([Chapters
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/) and [29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)). If a sufficient
concentration of the specific inhibitor can be achieved, the resulting
phenotypic changes can be instructive. When studying in vitro systems, even
monosaccharides can be used in such experiments, as exemplified by the Man-6-P
receptor pathway ([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). However, it is often
necessary to use competing glycans at high concentrations to block the
relatively low-affinity site interactions between a GBP and its ligand.
Intrinsically low site affinity can sometimes be overcome using a multivalent
form of the cognate glycan. Finally, especially when studying complex
multicellular systems, introduced glycans could be cross-recognized by other
known or unknown binding proteins, giving a confusing phenotypic readout.

A powerful approach is to use degradative enzymes known to be highly specific
for a particular glycan sequence. Many such specific enzymes can be obtained
from microbial pathogens. The advantage of this approach is that one is
eliminating certain structures selectively after normal synthesis has been
completed rather than interfering with the biosynthetic cellular machinery.
Thus, for example, sialidase treatment abolished lymphocyte binding to the
high endothelial venules of lymph nodes and provided the first indication of
endogenous ligands for L-selectin ([Chapter 32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/));
injection of endoneuraminidase into the developing retina suggested specific
roles for polySias ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)); and injection of
heparanase into developing embryos gave randomization of left–right axis
formation ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). In all such studies, the
purity of the enzyme used is critical and appropriate controls are necessary
(preferably including a specific inhibitor of the enzyme or a catalytically
inactive version of the enzyme). If the enzyme is of bacterial origin, trace
amounts of contaminants such as endotoxin are also of concern. A genetic
approach can be used to avoid problems of contamination by expressing a cDNA
for the glycan-modifying enzyme in the intact cell or animal. For example,
transgenic expression of an influenza sialic acid–specific 9-O-acetylesterase
in mice resulted in either early or late abnormalities in development,
depending on the promoter used. Unfortunately, many such glycosidases may not
function well or at all in the context of an intact animal, which can limit
the spectrum of glycan structures that may be probed for function with this
approach.

This is intuitively a powerful approach for understanding glycan function. It
is easiest to study glycosylation mutants in cultured cell lines ([Chapter
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). Although genetic or acquired defects in
glycosylation are obtained relatively easily in cells, these defects may have
limited or not easily discernible biological consequences. This may be because
of lack of other factors or cell types that would be present in the intact
organism. For example, the cognate receptor for the glycan may not be present
in the same cell type. Of course, such mutants can still be used to analyze
basic structural functions of the glycans and their relevance to the
physiology of a single cell. Furthermore, one can reintroduce external factors
or other cell types thought to interact with the modified glycan. Some mutants
can also be reintroduced into intact organisms, for example, to study
tumorigenicity or metastatic behavior of malignant cells.

Although much useful information can be gained by such approaches, many of the
more specific roles of glycans need to be uncovered by studying mutations in
the intact multicellular organism. Looking at the various glycosylation
mutants that have been recently discovered in flies, worms, mice, and humans,
it is clear that glycan changes often affect multiple systems (are
pleiotropic) and that the phenotypes are unpredictable and highly variable.
This has become apparent, in part, by comparing the genotype-phenotype
relationships in naturally occurring human disorders of glycosylation and in
experimentally induced glycosylation disorders in mice. In humans, naturally
occurring disease-associated mutations in glycosylation pathways often leave
some residual enzymatic function intact ([Chapters 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)
and [45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)), whereas deletion of the corresponding
enzymatic locus in mice often leads to a lethal phenotype during
embryogenesis. Regardless, the value of engineering glycosylation mutants in
intact animals is evident. Indeed, complete elimination of most major glycan
classes of vertebrates has been accomplished in mice, and in every instance
has lead to embryonic lethality. Given the complex phenotypes and the
potential for early developmental lethality, the ability to disrupt
glycosylation-related genes in a temporally controlled and cell type–specific
manner can be particularly valuable.

Eliminating a specific glycan receptor can yield a phenotype that may be very
instructive with regard to the functions of the glycan. As with genetic
modification of the glycan, the results are more likely to be useful if
studied in the intact organism. However, the receptor protein may have other
functions unrelated to glycan recognition. Conversely, the glycan in question
may have other functions not mediated by the receptor. For example, genetic
elimination of the CD22/Siglec-2 receptor and the ST6Gal-I enzyme that
generates its ligand gave complementary, but not identical, phenotypes
([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). However, breeding the two mutations
into the same mouse indicated that there were indeed epistatic interactions.
Similar results were obtained by mating mice deficient in making polysialic
acid and in synthesizing the protein carrier of polysialic acids, NCAM.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Merrina
Anugraham, Donald Bernsteel, Martina Delbianco, and Steve M. Fernandes.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.008

A multitude of glycosyltransferases (GTs), glycoside hydrolases (GHs; also
called glycosidases), nucleotide sugar transporters, and other enzymes are
required to synthesize and metabolize glycans. Also, many genes encode glycan-
binding proteins (GBPs), which recognize specific glycan structures. This
chapter provides a genomic perspective of the genes that code for GTs, GHs,
and GBPs.

The glycome comprises all the glycan structures synthesized by an organism
([Chapter 51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)). It is analogous to the genome, the
transcriptome, and/or the proteome but even more dynamic, and it has higher
structural complexity that has yet to be fully defined. Cells of different
types will synthesize a subset of the glycome based on their differentiation
state and physiological environment. The human and mouse glycomes have many
glycan structures in common, but a few are unique or have divergent functional
properties. For example, unlike humans, rodents synthesize cytidine
monophospho- _N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid (CMP-Neu5Gc), for Neu5Gc transfer to
N- and O-glycans ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). Similarly, the gene
encoding α1-3 galactosyltransferase is functional in the mouse but not in
human ([Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)). The human and fly genomes include
orthologous genes that encode GTs that catalyze the same reaction, but they
also have GTs that are unique. Thus, protein _O_ -fucosyltransferase 1
(POFUT1) in mammals and Ofut1 in flies transfer fucose to
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) receptors and are examples of a
conserved GT. In contrast, flies do not make complex N-glycans with four
branches, which are common in mammalian glycoproteins ([Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and [20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)). Additionally, flies
make unique glycolipids absent from mammals that are important for conserved
signaling pathways mediated by the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor or
Notch receptors ([Chapter 26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)).

The genome encodes all of the enzymes, transporters, and other activities
necessary to construct the glycome of an organism. Few complete genomes were
sequenced in 1999 when this book first appeared. This grew to approximately
650 genomes by the second edition (2009) and has now increased dramatically,
with more than 5000 included in the [Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes ([CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/)) database of
the 25,000 genomes at the stage of permanent draft (Genomes Online Database).
Similarly, the number of GTs with a known three-dimensional structure has
grown from one in 1999 to 158 in 2015. The [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/)
database is dedicated to coping with the staggering increases in sequences and
structures ([National Center for Biotechnology
Information](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)).1

In the pregenomic era, the glycobiology of mammals, invertebrates, plants,
bacteria, and viruses did not overlap extensively, and progress in one domain
did not immediately benefit the others. With several genomes being released
each day, the evolutionary history of GT sequences has emerged. We now know
that GTs from various organisms display the same basic structural folds, and
we can harness the relationships between the sequence and the specificity of a
GT ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). The content of genomes can also be
examined from a glycobiology perspective (e.g., by listing candidate GHs or
GTs in a genome) and compared across genomes to see which families have
expanded or disappeared during evolution. Examination of completely sequenced
genomes suggests that a few percent of any genome encodes GTs and GHs. The
number of GT genes in different organisms is variable, but varies much less
within a taxonomic clade. The number of GTs tends to be greater than the
number of GHs, except for organisms that forage on complex glycans as a carbon
source. Thus, the genomes of saprophytic fungi and bacteria of the intestinal
flora can encode several hundred enzymes for the breakdown of glycans (i.e.,
five to 10 times more GHs than the number of GTs). The number of genes that
encode GBPs is more difficult to define because many have other functional
domains and have not been annotated as GBPs. A conservative estimate is that
mammalian genomes encode 100 to 200 GBPs.

As genomes of new organisms become available, their sequences are routinely
searched for genes that show similarity to known GTs, GHs, or GBPs. If a new
gene is not annotated, the sequence can be used to find annotated genes with
related sequences, either in the same species or across phylogeny, and this
provides a base for inferring the biochemical activity of the encoded protein.
The sequence of a new gene can also be analyzed for additional encoded motifs
such as signal peptides, transmembrane domains, glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) anchors ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)), or carboxy-terminal
retrieval sequences. The GTs are among the most versatile category of proteins
known in terms of the substrates they recognize. Thus, although it is
difficult to predict the reaction catalyzed by a GT or GH on the basis of its
sequence homology with a related GT or GH sequence, it is often possible to
predict the anomeric linkage of the sugar transferred or hydrolyzed,
respectively. Prokaryotic GHs have similarities to those of eukaryotes, and
with some exceptions, prokaryotic and eukaryotic GTs have one of two folds,
GT-A and GT-B, indicating two ancestors for essentially all GTs.

[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/)-active enzymes can
be classified according to several criteria. Substrate specificity forms the
simplest basis to assign an Enzyme Commission (EC) number by the International
Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB). GHs are given the code EC
3.2.1.x, where x represents substrate specificity. Similarly, GTs are
described as EC 2.4.y.z, where y defines the sugar transferred and z describes
the precise donor and acceptor. The EC number is given only after experimental
determination of enzymatic specificity. Thus, only about 330 GT and GH enzymes
currently have an EC number from the IUBMB.

The intrinsic problem with a classification system based on substrate (or
product) specificity is that it does not appropriately accommodate enzymes
that act on several substrates. It also fails to reflect the sequence or the
structural features of these enzymes. To circumvent these problems, a novel
system was introduced for classifying GHs and GTs on the basis of the
relationship between amino acid sequence and folding similarities. Regardless
of activity and substrate specificity, sequences that display similarity are
grouped in the same family. For GTs, classification was initiated in 1997
(approximately 500 sequences; 27 families). This classification is
continuously updated in the [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) database, which
listed approximately 260,000 GT sequences in approximately 100 families in
August 2016. [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) gives access to the various families
of GTs, GHs, polysaccharide lyases, and their carbohydrate-binding modules, as
well as several families of auxiliary activities, such as the recently
described lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases. Each
[CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) family is annotated with known enzyme activities
and includes catalytic and structural features. This summary is followed by a
list of the proteins and open reading frames (ORFs) belonging to each family,
with links to sequence and structural information available in public
databases. [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) features summary pages for
approximately 5000 publicly available genomes.

The earliest observation from the sequence-based families was that many
families are “polyspecific” and contain enzymes of different substrate
specificity. Polyspecific families indicate that (1) the acquisition of new
specificities by GHs and GTs is a common evolutionary event, (2) their
substrate specificities can be engineered for experimental or applied
purposes, and (3) their substrate (or product) specificities are governed by
fine details of three-dimensional structure, not by global fold. Human GTs
with experimentally determined activities, are compiled in several excellent
resources at [Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomics
(KEGG)](http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) and [Functional Glycomics
Gateway](http://www.functionalglycomics.org/). In contrast, assignments for
other organisms, like microbes, are often erroneous, because of misassignment
of EC numbers based on distant sequence relatedness. The challenge of the
postgenomic era is therefore to dissect this ever-growing list of ORFs whose
encoded proteins are candidate GTs of unknown donor, acceptor, and product
specificities.

The information presented by the wide variety of glycans on glycoconjugates is
deciphered by an equally versatile number of GBPs that recognize specific
sugars or glycans ([Chapters
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)–[38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). To understand the
biology behind protein–glycan interactions, it is imperative to identify all
of the GBPs and their glycan ligands.

GBPs were identified in the past by systematic biochemical studies that
determined their glycan-recognition properties. However, the recent explosion
of sequenced genomes makes it possible to identify genes likely to encode GBPs
by sequence similarity. For example, the mannose-binding lectins (MBLs) can
easily be identified because they show motifs found in C-type lectins
([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), as well as a collagen-like domain that
promotes their oligomerization and is necessary for host defense through
complement activation. A variant allele with changes in both the promoter and
structural regions of the human MBL gene ( _MBL2_ ) influences the stability
and serum concentration of the protein. Epidemiological studies have suggested
that genetically determined variations in MBL serum concentration influence
the susceptibility to, and the course of, different types of infections,
autoimmune reactions, and metabolic and cardiovascular diseases. The fact that
genetic variations in MBL are frequent indicates a dual role for MBL in host
defense and highlights the power of genomics to aid our understanding of human
disease.

Most of the studies on GBPs have been restricted to mammalian proteins (e.g.,
C-type lectins, galectins, and [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/siglecs/)), and their counterparts in plants and other “lower” organisms
are underexplored. An extended classification of GBPs is proposed in [Chapter
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/), where they are contrasted with binding proteins
that recognize sulfated glycosaminoglycans (which seem to have emerged
independently of each other, by convergent evolution).

Knowledge of the ligand specificity of a GBP is required to assign in vivo
functions. In cases in which there is a dearth of information, rational
predictions based on the framework and sequence of existing carbohydrate-
recognition domains (CRDs) have been found useful. Legume lectins represent a
class of GBPs identified decades ago that continues to provide perhaps the
best model for protein–glycan recognition. Moreover, discovery of the legume
lectin fold (jelly-roll motif) in mammalian lectins, such as galectins
([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)), calnexin, and calreticulin ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), highlights the preeminence of this fold in
carbohydrate recognition across phylogeny. Earlier work in the identification
of monosaccharide-binding specificities of legume lectins provided the
framework for finding their relatives in all forms of life ([Chapter
32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/)). This approach led to the assignment of glycan
specificities for proteins involved in the sorting of vesicular compartments,
and in glycoprotein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi
compartments of mammalian cells ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). Of
similar importance is the discovery of new galectins in the galectin-10 family
and galectin-like proteins in genome databases using similarity searches
([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). Likewise,
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/), a family of sialic
acid–binding [I-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/itypelectins/)
involved in regulating multiple biological responses ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)), show signature sequence motifs, and 17 members
have been identified in primates to date. It is important to note that the
mere presence of a [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) does not necessarily translate into
functional glycan-recognizing activity. This is because sequence motifs used
to identify CRDs often end up in a functionally inactive, lectin-like, CRD
fold ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).

[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) microarrays provide a high-
throughput means of detecting the interactions of GBPs with the diverse
oligosaccharide sequences of glycoproteins, glycolipids, and polysaccharides
([Chapter 30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)). The use of glass slides, microarray
printing technology, and surface patterning of engineered glycophages
displaying unique carbohydrate epitopes allows the production of glycan
microarrays with the potential to examine binding of all types of GBPs
(lectins, antiglycan monoclonal or serum antibodies, and glycan-binding
cytokines or chemokines) to several thousand unique glycans, simultaneously.
Binding is assessed by fluorescent or spectrometric techniques. Cross-platform
comparisons and several Web-based resources like GlycoPattern enable analysis
of array data for functional genomics. However, arrays that use different
linkers and/or different attachment chemistries can give quite variable
results, and the results need to be evaluated in the context of natural
binding phenomena.

It has long been known that many viruses use host glycans as specific binding
receptors for entering the cell ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)).
Similarly, several viruses encode lytic enzymes that break down host cell
surface glycans to release viral particles after viral replication.
[Genome](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/genome/) sequencing reveals that many
double-stranded DNA viruses also take advantage by adding sugars to host
glycoproteins through the use of viral GTs ([Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Although the biological role of viral GTs is
poorly understood, in several cases a function has been identified. For
example, the T4 bacteriophage encodes nucleases that degrade host cell DNA. To
protect its own genome, the phage modifies its DNA by replacing cytosine with
5-hydroxymethylcytosine and subsequently transferring glucose (Glc) to the
5-hydroxymethylcytosine using a specific UDP-Glc:DNA Glc-transferase. The
baculovirus enzyme ecdysteroid glucosyltransferase (EGT) disrupts the hormonal
balance of the insect host by catalyzing the conjugation of ecdysteroid
hormones with Glc or galactose (Gal). Expression of the EGT gene allows the
virus to block molting and pupation of infected insect larvae. Similarly,
Chloroviruses have enzymes in [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) family GT4 for the
glycosylation of their structural proteins. Serotype conversion in [_Shigella
flexneri_](/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Info&id=623&lvl=3&lin=f&keep=1&srchmode=1&unlock)
is mediated by temperate bacteriophages, which encode GTs that mediate
O-antigen conversion by the addition of Glc to O-antigen units. Finally, giant
viruses such as _Acanthamoeba polyphaga_ mimivirus with the largest known
viral genome (∼1.2 Mb), produces a glycosylation machinery with 12 putative
GTs for the synthesis of complex O-glycans.

Bacterial GTs play a major role in their symbiosis and their virulence. Some
bacteria such as _Campylobacter_ are able to N-glycosylate their proteins, but
the most universal role for bacterial glycosylation is in the synthesis of
cell-wall peptidoglycan, simple glycolipids, lipopolysaccharides and complex
exopolysaccharides ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). The GTs involved in
peptidoglycan biosynthesis are GT28 MurG, which adds _N_ -acetylglucosamine
(GlcNAc) to undecaprenyl diphospho- _N_ -MurNAc, and GT51, which polymerizes
undecaprenyl diphospho-MurNAc-GlcNAc. _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ produces an
extremely complex envelope that includes all of the above. In bacteria, the
role of these glycans is to provide a barrier that affords mechanical,
chemical, and biological protection to the cell. Some pathogenic or commensal
bacteria produce an outer glycan layer that mimics that of their hosts, in
order to evade host immune surveillance ([Chapters 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)
and [42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). _Pasteurella multocida_ produces a thick
hyaluronan capsule. Oral Streptococci produce two GTs for adhesion and
virulence, and the EPax gene GT enables colonization of the gut by
_Enterococcus faecalis_. Other pathogens such as _Escherichia coli_ K1 and
_Neisseria meningitidis_ produce a polyα2–8 sialic acid capsule. It is thought
that mammalian gut bacteria produce capsular polysaccharides that help the
maturation of the host immune system.

Archaea devote ∼1% of their genes to GTs but, on average, devote only 0.25% to
GHs, and there is almost no correlation with the number of GH genes and the
overall number of genes. Surprisingly, ∼20% of sequenced archaeal genomes
appear to be completely devoid of GHs. The most striking example is
_Methanosphaera stadtmanae_ , whose genome encodes at least 43 GTs but
apparently no GHs. This is not due to sequence divergence, because GHs are
readily detected in some Archaea. These observations suggest that (1)
horizontal transfer is likely the determining factor behind archaeal GH
repertoires, and (2) the Archaea in question do not recycle glycosidic bonds
elaborated by their own GTs. Although they do not make peptidoglycans like
bacteria, Archaea use nucleotide-activated oligosaccharides to produce a
variety of extracellular polysaccharides such as the heteropolysaccharide
“methanochondroitin” made by _Methanosarcina barkeri_ , which resembles
eukaryotic chondroitin sulfate ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Archaea
also make glycophospholipids and one relevant GT is GDP-
Glc:glucosyl-3-phosphoglycerate synthase from family GT81 in _Methanococcoides
burtonii_. In [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) family GT55, there are several
archaeal GDP-Man:mannosyl-3-phosphoglycerate synthases. A number of Archaea
have GTs related to bacterial and eukaryotic oligosaccharyltransferases ([CAZy
family GT66](http://www.cazy.org/GT66.html)), which is consistent with the
fact that Archaea use oligosaccharyldiphospholipids as sugar donors. It has
been shown that the archaeon _Methanococcus voltae_ uses this strategy to
transfer N-glycans to flagellin and S-layer proteins. Like bacteria and
eukaryotes, evolution toward an obligate symbiont lifestyle was also
accompanied by gene loss in Archaea. For example, the tiny genome of
_Nanoarchaeum equitans_ appears to encode only three GTs and no GHs.

With their large genomes and complex body plans that require different gene
expression in various tissues and/or at different developmental stages,
genomes of eukaryotes encode many more GTs and GHs than those of individual
bacteria and Archaeal species. But, overall, prokaryotes appear to use a
greater diversity of the monosaccharides that exist in nature ([Chapters
20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)–[23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)). Several eukaryotes
have also undergone genome reduction and lost most of their GT genes. Thus,
_Plasmodium falciparum_ and _Encephalitozoon cuniculi_ have only nine and
eight GTs, respectively. Overall, the abundance of GTs in free-living
eukaryotes correlates with evolution to multicellularity. Free-living fungi
and the unicellular marine green alga _Ostreococcus tauri_ have a number of
GTs similar to certain bacteria.

The genomes of “higher” plants encode more GTs than any other organism, with
approximately 560 in Arabidopsis, approximately 613 in rice, and approximately
740 in poplar! “Higher” plants have huge genomes resulting from several rounds
of complete genome duplication. The massive number of GTs in plants is due to
the expansion of several extremely populated GT families. For example,
_Arabidopsis_ , rice, and poplar have about 120, 200, and 300 GT1 genes,
respectively. “Higher” plants are characterized by extremely complex cell
walls made of various polysaccharides that can be rather simple like
cellulose, more complex as in hemicelluloses (e.g., xylans, glucuronoxylans,
galactomannans, xyloglucans), or extremely complex like the “hairy” regions of
pectin ([Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). Biosynthesis of pectin alone
requires the action of dozens of GTs. Differential expression in various
tissues is probably one of the driving forces behind the accumulation of
hundreds of genes encoding GTs in plants. Likewise, a diverse array of GHs are
involved in the remodeling of the plant cell wall during plant growth. Thus,
_Arabidopsis_ , rice, and poplar genomes encode about 400, 420, and 600 GHs,
respectively.

Although they do not encode an enormous number of GT genes like plants,
vertebrates are characterized by a large diversity of GT genes. Human GTs fall
into 43 [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) families, a number similar to that of
plants. Families that are present only in vertebrates are GT6, GT12, and most
GT29 family members (invertebrates have only one member of a particular
sialyltransferase subfamily, whereas vertebrates usually have many different
GT29 sialyltransferases belonging to several distinct subfamilies). However,
there are no GT families that are unique to humans or primates. The completion
of the first animal genomes also revealed a relative paucity in the number of
encoded GHs. Thus, the human genome codes for only about 100 GHs, with only a
dozen devoted to the digestion of only three glycans: sucrose, lactose, and a
portion of starch. The digestion of the immense majority of the plant cell-
wall polysaccharides in the diet is “outsourced” to the multitude of different
microorganisms that colonize the human gut. The genetic material of this
flora, the “microbiome,” greatly enlarges our limited genome. For instance a
single species of our gut bacteria such as _Bacteroides cellulosilyticus_ WH2
encodes about four times more GHs (373) than our genome.

One of the initial surprises that came with the completion of the first
genomes was that the human genome encodes fewer GTs (236) than that of the
nematode _Caenorhabditis elegans_ (272). _Drosophila melanogaster_ has only
151 GT genes. These gross numbers, however, mask important biological
differences. The comparative abundance of GTs in _C. elegans_ compared with
humans is essentially due to four GT families more highly represented in the
nematode: GT1 glucuronyltransferases (78 in _C. elegans_ , 35 in human), GT11
fucosyltransferases (26 in _C. elegans_ , 3 in human), GT14 β-xylosyl-
transferases and β1-6 GlcNAc-transferases (20 in _C. elegans_ , 11 in human),
and GT92 (26 in _C. elegans_ , 0 in human). For most other GT families, _C.
elegans_ appears to have the same number or fewer GT genes than humans. With
more than 400 GT genes, the bdelloid rotifer _Adineta vaga_ is the animal with
the largest known number of GTs. This large number is due to the ameiotic
reproduction mode of this animal, which is accompanied by a large rate of
horizontal gene acquisition from other organisms. _C. elegans_ has nearly 112
GHs, whereas _D. melanogaster_ has 104 and humans have 100. GH18 chitinase is
highly represented in _C. elegans_ and _D. melanogaster_ with 43 and 22
members, respectively.

In addition to catalytic specificity, the amino acid sequence of some GTs and
GHs can also contain one or more additional domains that modulate the activity
of the GT or GH. The most striking example is the two-domain mammalian heparan
synthases that have evolved for the addition of alternating sugars to form a
polysaccharide ([Chapters 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/) and
[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). The amino-terminal domain, which adds β1-4
glucuronic acid (GlcA) residues, belongs to GT47, whereas the carboxy-terminal
domain, which adds α1-4 GlcNAc residues, belongs to GT64. Some strains of
bacteria have a heparan synthase, which also consists of two catalytic
modules, from families GT2 and GT45 ([Figure
8.1](/books/NBK453035/figure/ch8.f1/?report=objectonly)), thereby providing a
beautiful example of convergent evolution. A similar example of convergent
evolution is found among chondroitin synthases, in which human enzymes are
made of GT31 and GT7 catalytic domains, whereas the bacterial equivalent is
made of tandem GT2 catalytic domains. Human LARGE is another bifunctional
glycosyltransferase made of two domains. The amino-terminal domain, which adds
α1-3 xylose (Xyl) residues, belongs to GT8, whereas the carboxy-terminal
domain, which adds β1-3 GlcA residues, belongs to GT49.

Other modular GTs can feature an appended GBP domain. The best-known examples
are polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (ppGalNAcTs; GALNT) that
transfer _N_ -acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to Ser or Thr residues ([Chapters
6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/) and [10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). In these enzymes, a
GT27 catalytic domain is linked to a GBP domain related to ricin and
classified as CBM13 in the [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) database. The GBP
domain binds to the GalNAc residue transferred to protein by the GT27
catalytic domain and tethers the enzyme to the substrate. Another example is
mouse polypeptide β-xylosyltransferase 2, in which a GT14 catalytic domain is
linked to a carboxy-terminal domain that is thought to act as a GBP.

The GHs can also be modular, with the catalytic module appended to one or more
other modules whose role is to bind polysaccharides. Although human GHs are
infrequently modular, those of microbes involved in plant cell-wall
degradation can have more than five different modules assembled in a single
polypeptide. Human acidic chitinase is an example of a mammalian modular GH
having a CBM14 domain appended at the carboxyl terminus of the GH18 catalytic
domain. The most intricate architecture of GHs is found in certain
environmental bacteria, such as _Clostridium thermocellum_ , which elaborate a
macromolecular complex called a “cellulosome” in which a large variety of
modular plant cell-wall hydrolases are assembled together on a scaffolding
protein. This strategy enables the assembly of dozens of catalytic modules
simultaneously targeting the various polysaccharides that make up the plant
cell wall.

In summary, the genome comprises the DNA of an organism, and it therefore
includes all the genes that produce the glycome, which represents all of the
glycans made by an organism. Although within an organism, almost every cell
that contains a nucleus and mitochondria has an identical genome, cells
typically differ in the portion of the glycome they express. Thus, their
glycan complement depends on which genes are actively transcribed and which
transcripts are translated and stably expressed in a particular cell type.
Transcription, splicing, translation, and posttranslational processing may
vary depending on the state of differentiation and physiological environment
of a cell. Therefore, during development and differentiation or under
different environmental conditions, the glycan repertoire of a cell represents
a subset of all the glycans that an organism is capable of making. To describe
this variation, it is common to qualify the term glycome when referring to the
glycans made by a particular tissue or cell type (e.g., T-cell glycome,
hepatocyte glycome, or serum glycome) and to note the particular stage of
growth (e.g., fetal liver glycome and breast cancer serum glycome). This is
because the glycome of a given cell in a given species can undergo substantial
changes in response to environmental stimuli ranging from pH and ionic
strength to hormonal stimulation or inflammation. Combined with the “assembly-
line” nature of the Golgi apparatus ([Chapter 4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)) and
potential remodeling by GHs, full knowledge of the GT transcriptome is often a
poor predictor of the actual glycome of a given cell type, and there is
currently no substitute for carrying out glycomic and glycoproteomic analysis
([Chapter 51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)).

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Wu Di, Anabel
Gonzelez-Gil, and Shweta Varshney.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.009

N-Glycans are covalently attached to protein at asparagine (Asn) residues by
an N-glycosidic bond. Although diverse sugars are attached to Asn in
prokaryotes ([Chapters 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and
[22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)), all eukaryotic N-glycans begin with GlcNAcβ1–Asn
and are the focus of this chapter. The biosynthesis of N-glycans is most
complex in mammals and is described here in detail. Terminal sugars that
largely determine the diversity of N-glycans are described in [Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/). [Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycosylation/)-mediated quality control of protein folding by N-glycans
is presented in [Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/), and the
mannose-6-phosphate recognition determinant on N-glycans, necessary for
targeting lysosomal hydrolases to lysosomes, is described in [Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/). Human congenital disorders of glycosylation
arising from defects in N-glycan synthesis are discussed in [Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/).

The GlcNAcβ1–Asn linkage was discovered by biochemical analyses of ovalbumin.
The minimal amino acid sequence to receive an N-glycan is Asn-X-Ser/Thr in
which “X” is any amino acid except Pro. However, not all Asn residues in this
sequon are N-glycosylated, as discussed below. Other linkages to Asn include
Glc to Asn in laminin of mammals, the S-layer in Archaea and adhesins in some
Gram-negative bacteria, GalNAc and GlcNAc to Asn in Archaea, and rhamnose or
bacillosamine to Asn in bacteria. In a sweet corn glycoprotein, Arg is found
in N-linkage to Glc.

N-[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) synthesis begins on a lipid-
like polyisoprenoid molecule termed dolichol-phosphate (Dol-P) in eukaryotes.
Following synthesis of an oligosaccharide that contains as many as 14 sugars,
the N-glycan is transferred “en bloc” to protein. This synthetic pathway is
conserved in all metazoa, plants, and yeast. Bacteria use related mechanisms
to synthesize cell wall ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). N-Glycans
affect many properties of glycoproteins including their conformation,
solubility, antigenicity, activity, and recognition by glycan-binding
proteins. Introduction of an N-glycan site (Asn-X-Ser/Thr) is used as a method
to localize or orient a glycoprotein or to follow its movement through the
cell. Defects in N-glycan synthesis lead to a variety of human diseases
([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

All eukaryotic N-glycans share a common core sequence,
Manα1-3(Manα1-6)Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–Asn-X-Ser/Thr, and are classified
into three types: (1) oligomannose, in which only Man residues extend the
core; (2) complex, in which “antennae” initiated by GlcNAc extend the core;
and (3) hybrid, in which Man extends the Manα1-6 arm of the core and one or
two GlcNAcs extend the Manα1-3 arm ([Figure
9.1](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f1/?report=objectonly)).

N-Glycans are added to secreted and membrane-bound glycoproteins at Asn-X-
Ser/Thr sequons. About 70% of proteins contain this sequon and ∼70% of sequons
carry an N-glycan. Experimental mapping of the murine N-glycoproteome revealed
more than 10,000 different N-glycosylation sites. Occasionally, N-glycans
occur at Asn-X-Cys and rarely with a different amino acid in the third
position. The transfer of an N-glycan to Asn-X-Ser/Thr occurs on the lumenal
side of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane during or after the
translocation of the protein substrate. There is no definitive evidence that
N-glycans occur on cytoplasmic or nuclear proteins nor on the cytoplasmic
portions of membrane proteins. Only Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequons accessible to the ER
lumen are known to receive an N-glycan. The identity of “X” may reduce the
efficiency of glycosylation, such as when “X” is acidic (Asp or Glu), or
enhance the efficiency, such as when Phe is in an adjacent reverse turn.
However, although the presence of Asn-X-Ser/Thr is necessary for the receipt
of an N-glycan, transfer does not always occur, because of conformational or
other constraints during glycoprotein folding. Thus, Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequons
encoded by a cDNA are referred to as potential N-glycan sites. Proof that an
N-glycan is actually present requires experimental evidence, as described
later in this chapter.

N-Glycans of eukaryotes may be released from Asn using the bacterial enzyme
peptide-N-glycosidase F (PNGase F). This enzyme will remove oligomannose,
hybrid, and complex N-glycans attached to Asn unless the N-glycan core has
certain modifications found in slime molds, plants, insects, and parasites.
Another enzyme termed PNGase A (from almonds) will remove all N-glycans. Both
enzymes are amidases that release N-glycans attached to the nitrogen of Asn,
thereby converting Asn to Asp. Therefore, sites of glycosylation can be
deduced by amino acid sequence analysis performed before and after PNGase F
treatment. Other bacterial enzymes cleave between the two GlcNAc residues of
the N-glycan core, leaving one GlcNAc attached to Asn.
[Endoglycosidase](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/endoglycosidase/) H releases
oligomannose and hybrid N-glycans but not complex N-glycans. Endoglycosidase
F1 is similar to endoglycosidase H, whereas endoglycosidase F2 releases
primarily biantennary N-glycans, and endoglycosidase F3 releases bi- and
triantennary N-glycans with a preference for those with a Fuc residue in the
core. N-Glycans may also be released by hydrazinolysis or by exhaustive
digestion with a protease that removes all amino acids except for the Asn.
Released N-glycans may be purified by conventional ion-exchange and size-
exclusion chromatography, high-performance liquid chromotography
([HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/))
methods, and affinity chromatography on glycan-binding proteins such as
lectins. Lectins for glycan analysis are usually obtained from plants
([Chapter 48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)). Release of N-glycans using chemical and
enzymic methods, purification, and analysis are described in [Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/).

N-[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) biosynthesis occurs in two
phases and in two compartments of eukaryotic cells, the ER and the Golgi
([Chapter 4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)). The first phase is a highly conserved
pathway that proceeds at the ER membrane on the lipid carrier Dol-P. An
oligosaccharide assembled on Dol-P is transferred to Asn in selected Asn-X-
Ser/Thr sequons of secretory and membrane proteins during their translocation
into the ER. The second phase begins with processing of N-glycans by
glycosidases and glycosyltransferases in the lumen of the ER and continues in
the Golgi in a species-, cell type–, protein-, and even site-specific manner.
Many of the glycosidases and glycosyltransferases are differentially expressed
and exquisitely sensitive to the physiological state of the cell. All
glycosyltransferases use activated sugars (nucleotide sugars, dolichol-sugars)
as substrates ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). Thus, a mature glycoprotein
carries N-glycans that depend on the complement of expressed glycosylation
genes in the cell type in which the glycoprotein is made and on the
physiological state of that cell that may affect the localization and activity
of glycosylation enzymes and transporters.

[Dolichol](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/dolichol/) is a polyisoprenol lipid
comprised of five-carbon isoprene units ([Figure
9.2](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f2/?report=objectonly)). The most common
yeast dolichol has 14 isoprene units, whereas dolichols from other eukaryotes,
including mammals, may have up to 19 isoprene units. The structure of the
mature N-glycan precursor synthesized on Dol-P is shown in [Figure
9.3](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f3/?report=objectonly). Genetic studies in
_Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ have identified conserved _ALG_ (Asn-linked
glycosylation) loci that encode the biosynthetic machinery for the assembly of
the lipid-linked oligosaccharide in eukaryotes ([Figure
9.3](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f3/?report=objectonly)).

The first step is catalyzed by ALG7 (DPAGT1 in mammals), a
GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase that transfers GlcNAc-1-P from UDP-GlcNAc to form
Dol-P-P-GlcNAc. Tunicamycin, an inhibitor of this enzyme, is used to inhibit
N-glycosylation in cells. A second GlcNAc and five Man residues are
subsequently transferred from UDP-GlcNAc and GDP-Man, respectively, to
generate Man5GlcNAc2-P-P-Dol on the cytoplasmic side of the ER membrane
([Figure 9.3](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f3/?report=objectonly)). All these
enzymes transfer only the sugar portion of the nucleotide sugar. The
Man5GlcNAc2-P-P-Dol precursor translocates across the ER membrane bilayer via
a “flippase” genetically linked to the _RFT1_ locus in yeast. Man5GlcNAc2-P-P-
Dol is extended by the addition of four Man and three Glc residues transferred
from Dol-P-Man and Dol-P-Glc, respectively. Dol-P-Man and Dol-P-Glc donors are
formed on the cytoplasmic side of the ER membrane from GDP-Man and UDP-Glc.
Dol-P-Man and Dol-P-Glc must also be flipped across the ER bilayer. Mammalian
MPDU1 is an ER membrane protein necessary for the utilization of Dol-P-Man and
Dol-P-Glc in the ER lumen in the synthesis of the mature N-glycan precursor
Glc3Man9GlcNAc2-P-P-Dol ([Figure
9.3](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f3/?report=objectonly)). This 14-sugar glycan
is transfered by oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) to Asn in receptive Asn-X-
Ser/Thr sequons in protein regions that have translocated across the ER
membrane.

OST is a multisubunit protein complex in the ER membrane except in the case of
the kinetoplastids ([Chapter 43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)). OST catalyzes the
transfer of the oligosaccharide from Dol-P-P to Asn-X-Ser/Thr in newly
synthesized regions of proteins during passage through the translocon into the
ER. OST has a high specificity for the completely assembled oligosaccharide,
which is Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 in most eukaryotes. When incomplete oligosaccharides
are assembled, transfer efficiency is reduced resulting in hypoglycosylation
of glycoproteins that mature with empty N-glycan sites. All OST subunits are
transmembrane proteins with between 1 and 13 transmembrane domains. The OST
complex cleaves the high-energy GlcNAc-P bond, releasing Dol-P-P in the
process ([Figure 9.3](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f3/?report=objectonly)).
Yeast OST is comprised of eight different subunits Stt3p, Ost1p, Wbp1p, Swp1p,
Ost2p, Ost4p, Ost5p, and Ost3p or Ost6p. Stt3p is the catalytic subunit of the
enzyme. The two OST complexes (containing either of the thioredoxin-subunit
Ost3p or Ost6p) have a different protein–substrate specificity. The complexity
of OST increases in multicellular organisms. In mammals, there are two
different catalytic STT3 subunits that both associate with ribophorins I and
II, OST48, OST4, and DAD1 proteins (homologs of the yeast Ost1p, Swp1p, Wbp1p,
Ost4p, and Ost2p, respectively). The STT3A complex (OSTA), closely associated
with the translocon, contains the KCP2 and DC2 subunits, whereas the STT3B
complex (OSTB) that has either MAGT1 or TUSC3 (homologs of Ost3p/Ost6p)
glycosylates polypeptides posttranslationally after translocation into the ER.
On binding to the catalytic STT3 subunit, the client peptide adopts a 180°
turn, making polypeptide folding a competing reaction for N-glycosylation.
Indeed, the thioredoxin subunits of the OST complex (Ost3p/Ost6p; MAGT1/TUSC1)
modulate the oxidative folding of the client polypeptide thereby extending the
polypeptide substrate range of OST. About 600 N-glycosylation sites have been
experimentally defined in yeast, and more than 10,000 in murine glycoproteins.

Following the covalent attachment of the 14-sugar glycan to Asn-X-Ser/Thr in a
protein, processing reactions trim the N-glycan in the ER. The initial steps
have key roles in regulating glycoprotein folding via interactions with ER
chaperones that recognize specific features of the trimmed N-glycan ([Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). Processing of Glc3Man9GlcNAc2Asn begins with the
sequential removal of Glc residues by α-glucosidases I (MOGS) and II (GANAB)
([Figure 9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)). Both
glucosidases function in the lumen of the ER, with α-glucosidase I acting
specifically on the terminal α1–2Glc and α-glucosidase II sequentially
removing the two inner α1–3Glc residues. Removal of Glc residues and the
transient readdition of the innermost α1–3Glc during protein folding
contribute to ER retention time. The removal of Glc may be prevented
experimentally by the use of glucosidase I inhibitors such as castanospermine
and deoxynojirimycin ([Chapter 55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)). Following
inhibition, N-glycans retain the three Glc residues and usually lose one or
two Man residues as they pass through the ER and _medial-_ Golgi, resulting in
Glc3Man7–9GlcNAc2 structures on mature glycoproteins. Before exiting the ER,
ER α-mannosidase I (MAN1B1), removes the terminal α1-2Man from the central arm
of Man9GlcNAc2 to yield a Man8GlcNAc2 isomer ([Figure
9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)). ER degradation-
enhancing α-mannosidase I–like (EDEM) proteins recognize misfolded
glycoproteins and target them for ER degradation ([Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). The majority of glycoproteins exiting the ER to
the Golgi carry N-glycans with either eight or nine Man residues.

Some N-glycans in the _cis_ -Golgi retain a Glc residue because of incomplete
processing in the ER. In this case, Golgi endo-α-mannosidase cleaves
internally between the two Man residues of the Glcα1-3Manα1-2Manα1-2 moiety,
thereby generating a Man8GlcNAc2 isomer different from that produced by ER
α-mannosidase I. Trimming of α1-2Man residues continues with the action of
α1-2 mannosidases IA and IB (MAN1A1, MAN1A2) in the _cis_ -Golgi to give
Man5GlcNAc2 ([Figure 9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)),
a key intermediate in the pathway to hybrid and complex N-glycans ([Figure
9.1](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f1/?report=objectonly)). Some Man5GlcNAc2 may
also escape further modification. In these cases, a mature membrane or
secreted glycoprotein will carry Man5–9GlcNAc2 N-glycans. In addition, the
action of ER α-mannosidase I can be blocked experimentally by the inhibitor
deoxymannojirimycin, resulting in Man8GlcNAc2 on mature glycoproteins. Most
mature glycoproteins have some oligomannose N-glycans that are not processed
in the _cis_ -Golgi.

Biosynthesis of hybrid and complex N-glycans ([Figure
9.1](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f1/?report=objectonly)) is initiated in the
_medial_ -Golgi by the action of an N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase called
GlcNAc-TI (MGAT1) which adds a GlcNAc residue to the C-2 of the α1-3Man in the
core of Man5GlcNAc2 ([Figure
9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)). Subsequently, the
majority of N-glycans are trimmed by α-mannosidase II enzymes MAN2A1 or MAN2A2
in the _medial_ -Golgi, which remove the terminal α1-3Man and α1-6Man residues
from GlcNAcMan5GlcNAc2 to form GlcNAcMan3GlcNAc2. It is important to note that
α-mannosidase II cannot trim Man5GlcNAc2 unless it has been acted on by MGAT1.
Once both Man residues are removed, a second GlcNAc is added to the C-2 of the
α1-6Man in the N-glycan core by the action of GlcNAc-TII (MGAT2) to yield the
precursor for all biantennary, complex N-glycans. Hybrid N-glycans are formed
if the GlcNAcMan5GlcNAc2 glycan produced by MGAT1 is not acted on by
α-mannosidase II. Incomplete action of α-mannosidase II can result in
GlcNAcMan4GlcNAc2 hybrids. Small oligomannose N-glycans have been found in
relatively large amounts in invertebrates and plants. These Man3–4GlcNAc2
N-glycans (paucimannose N-glycans) are formed from GlcNAcMan3–4GlcNAc2
following removal of the peripheral GlcNAc by a Golgi hexosaminidase that acts
after α-mannosidase II ([Chapters 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/) and
[26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)).

The complex N-glycan shown in the _medial_ -Golgi of [Figure
9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly) has two antennae or
branches initiated by the addition of two GlcNAc residues. Additional branches
can be initiated at C-4 of the core α1-3Man (by GlcNAc-TIV; MGAT4A, MGAT4B)
and C-6 of the core α1-6Man by GlcNAc-TV (MGAT5) to yield tri- and tetra-
antennary N-glycans ([Figure
9.5](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f5/?report=objectonly)). MGAT5B or GlcNAc-TIX
catalyzes the same reaction but preferentially on O-mannose glycans in brain.
Another branch, found in birds and fish, can be initiated at C-4 of the core
α1-6Man by GlcNAc-TVI (MGAT6; [Figure
9.5](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f5/?report=objectonly)). Genes related to
GlcNAc-TVI exist in mammalian genomes. Complex and hybrid N-glycans may also
carry a “bisecting” GlcNAc residue that is attached to the β-Man of the core
by GlcNAc-TIII (MGAT3) ([Figure
9.5](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f5/?report=objectonly)). A bisecting GlcNAc
on a biantennary N-glycan is shown in [Figure
9.5](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f5/?report=objectonly), and it may be present
in all of the more highly branched N-glycans.

Further sugar additions convert the limited repertoire of hybrid and branched
N-glycans into an extensive array of mature, complex N-glycans comprising (1)
sugar additions to the N-glycan core, (2) elongation of branching GlcNAc
residues by sugar additions, and (3) “capping” or “decoration” of elongated
branches.

The major core modification in vertebrate N-glycans is the addition of α1-6Fuc
to the Asn-linked GlcNAc in the N-glycan core ([Figure
9.5](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f5/?report=objectonly)). The
α1-6fucosyltransferase (FUT8) requires the prior action of MGAT1 ([Figure
9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)). In invertebrate
glycoproteins, both core GlcNAc residues may receive a Fuc in an α1–3 and/or
α1-6 linkage ([Chapters 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/) and
[26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)). In plants, Fuc is transferred to the Asn-linked
GlcNAc only in α1-3 linkage ([Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). Also in
plant and helminth glycoproteins, the addition of β1-2Xyl to the β-Man of the
core is common. This xylosyltransferase also requires the prior action of
MGAT1. Xylose has not been detected in vertebrate N-glycans.

The majority of complex and hybrid N-glycans have extended branches that are
made by the addition of Gal to the initiating GlcNAc to produce the ubiquitous
building block Galβ1-4GlcNAc, referred to as a type-2 [_N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/)
or“LacNAc”sequence ([Figure
9.6](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f6/?report=objectonly)). The sequential
addition of LacNAc disaccharides gives tandem repeats termed poly-LacNAc. In
some glycoproteins, β-linked GalNAc is added to GlcNAc instead of Gal,
yielding antennae with a GalNAcβ1–4GlcNAc (LacdiNAc) extension. The structures
and biosynthesis of poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamines are discussed further in
[Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/).

The most important “capping” reactions involve the addition of sialic acids,
Fuc, Gal, GlcNAc, and sulfate to complex N-glycan branches. Capping sugars are
most commonly α-linked and therefore protrude away from the β-linked poly-
LacNAc branches, thus facilitating the presentation of terminal sugars to
lectins and antibodies. Many of these structures are shared by N- and
O-glycans and by glycolipids ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Terminal
Sias can be further modified in various ways ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

The various reactions described above potentially yield a myriad of complex
N-glycans that differ in branch number, composition, length, capping
arrangements, and core modifications. Some examples to illustrate this
diversity are shown in [Figure
9.6](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f6/?report=objectonly). Many more examples
may be found throughout this book.

Lysosomal hydrolases degrade proteins, lipids, and glycans in the lysosome.
Many of these enzymes are targeted to lysosomes by a specialized trafficking
pathway that requires phosphorylated oligomannose N-glycans. The
phosphorylation step involves the transfer of GlcNAc-1-P to C-6 of Man
residues of oligomannose N-glycans on lysosomal hydrolases in the _cis_ -Golgi
([Figure 9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)). A
glycosidase in the _trans_ -Golgi removes the GlcNAc to generate Man-6-P
recognized by Man-6-P receptor (M6PR). M6PRs transport lysosomal hydrolases to
an acidified compartment which ultimately fuses with the lysosome. The details
of this trafficking pathway are presented in [Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/).

The glycosyltransferases in the ER are mainly multitransmembrane proteins
woven into the ER membrane. In contrast, the glycosyltransferases in Golgi
compartments are generally type II membrane proteins with a small cytoplasmic
amino-terminal domain, a single transmembrane domain, and a large lumenal
domain that has an elongated stem region extending from the membrane and a
globular catalytic domain ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). The stem region
is often cleaved by signal peptide peptidase-like proteases, particularly
SPPL-3, releasing the catalytic domain into the lumen of the Golgi and
allowing its secretion. Thus, extracellular soluble forms of many
glycosyltransferases exist in tissues and sera. However, extracellular soluble
glycosyltransferases are not expected to function as transferases because
nucleotide sugars are not known to be present extracellularly. [Nucleotide
sugars](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nucleotidesugars/) are synthesized in the
cytoplasm, except for CMP-sialic acids, which are synthesized in the nucleus
([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). They are subsequently concentrated in the
appropriate compartment following transport across the membrane by specialized
nucleotide sugar transporters that translocate CMP-Sias, UDP-Gal, UDP-Glc,
UDP-GlcNAc, GDP-Fuc, and other nucleotide sugars. A few of these transporters
can transport more than one nucleotide sugar. Each transporter is a
multitransmembrane protein that usually contains ten membrane-spanning
domains. Some CMP-Sias can be further modified within the lumen of the Golgi
by O-acetyl groups before transfer ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

Glycoproteins often have a range of different N-glycans on a particular Asn-X-
Ser/Thr N-glycosylation sequon, leading to glycan heterogeneity at each site.
Furthermore, when there is more than one Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequon per molecule,
different molecules in a population may have different subsets of N-glycans on
different sequons, leading to glycoprotein microheterogeneity. Glycoproteins
that differ only in their N-glycan complement are termed glycoforms. The
variation in N-glycans of a glycoprotein may be due to protein conformation
affecting substrate availability for Golgi glycosidases or
glycosyltransferases, nucleotide sugar metabolism, transport rate of the
glycoprotein through the lumen of the ER and Golgi, and the proximity of an
Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequon to a transmembrane domain. Also, localization of
glycosyltransferases within subcompartments of the Golgi can determine which
enzymes encounter N-glycan acceptors. It is important to note that
glycosylation enzymes often compete for the same acceptor and that most
glycosyltransferases and glycosidases require the prior actions of other
glycosyltransferases and glycosidases before they can act ([Figure
9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Determining the functions of N-glycans may be accomplished using inhibitors
including tunicamycin that blocks the first step of N-glycosylation, or
castanospermine, deoxynojirimycin, and swainsonine that block N-glycan
processing; or glycosylation mutants of model organisms such as yeast,
cultured mammalian cells, _Drosophila melanogaster_ , _Caenorhabditis elegans_
, zebrafish, and mouse. The various chemical inhibitors of N-glycan synthesis
are discussed in [Chapter 55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/). Many yeast mutants in
the synthesis and initial processing of N-glycans are identified in [Figure
9.3](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f3/?report=objectonly), and three mutants of
cultured cells with altered glycosylation are identified in [Figure
9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly) and described in
detail in [Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/). Mutant cells or organisms with
an altered N-glycosylation ability provide enormous insights into the
biological functions of N-glycans, and their contributions to the biochemical
properties of a glycoprotein in terms of structure, activity, susceptibility
to proteases, and antigenicity. In addition, mutant cells and organisms allow
glycosylation pathways that operate in vivo to be defined. A cell or organism
with a loss-of-function mutation usually accumulates the biosynthetic
intermediate that is the substrate of the activity lost by the mutant. Gain-
of-function mutations reveal alternative pathways or glycosylation reactions
that may occur. N-glycan functions have also been determined from the features
of human diseases called congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

Mouse mutants in particular have provided enormous insights into the functions
of individual sugars present in N-glycans, as well as the functions of whole
classes of N-glycans. Thus, deletion of the _Mgat1_ gene that encodes MGAT1
prevents the synthesis of complex and hybrid N-glycans, and Man5GlcNAc2 is
found at all complex and hybrid N-glycan sites ([Figure
9.4](/books/NBK453020/figure/ch9.f4/?report=objectonly)). Whereas the absence
of MGAT1 does not affect the viability or growth of Lec1 cultured cells,
elimination of MGAT1 in the mouse results in death during embryonic
development ([Chapter 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)). The complex N-glycans are
important in retaining growth factor and cytokine receptors at the cell
surface, probably through interactions with glycan-binding proteins such as
galectins or cytokines, such as transforming growth factor-β. Deletion of
genes encoding sialyltransferases, fucosyltransferases, or branching _N_
-acetylglucosaminyltranferases other than MGAT1 has generally produced viable
mice with defects in immunity or neuronal cell migration, emphysema, or
inflammation. N-Glycans may carry the sugar determinants recognized by
selectins that mediate cell–cell interactions important for leukocyte
extravasation from the blood stream and regulate lymphocyte homing to lymph
nodes ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). N-Glycans are known to become
more branched when cells become cancerous, and this change facilitates cancer
progression ([Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). Tumors formed in mice
lacking MGAT5 are retarded in their progression. Thus, certain
glycosyltransferases may be appropriate targets for the design of cancer
therapeutics.

The authors acknowledge the contribution of Harry Schachter to previous
versions of this chapter. The authors appreciate helpful comments and
suggestions from Harry Schachter, Yuta Maki, Naoki Nakagawa, Ganesh Subedi,
Yasuhiko Kizuka, and Alexandra Walker.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.010

Many glycoproteins carry glycans initiated by GalNAc attached to the hydroxyl
of Ser or Thr residues. Mucins are the class of glycoproteins carrying the
greatest number of O-GalNAc glycans (also called mucin-type O-glycans), but
this posttranslational modification is common among many glycoproteins. The
sugars found in O-GalNAc glycans include GalNAc, Gal, GlcNAc, Fuc, and Sia,
whereas Man, Glc, or Xyl residues are not represented. [Sialic
acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) may be modified by
O-acetylation, and Gal and GlcNAc by sulfation. The length of O-GalNAc glycans
may vary from a single GalNAc to more than 20 sugar residues and can include
blood group and other glycan epitopes. This chapter describes the structures,
biosynthesis, and functions of O-GalNAc glycans in mammals.

About 150 years ago, E. Eichwald and E. Hoppe-Seyler noted that highly
glycosylated proteins, which they termed mucins, are found throughout the
body. Mucins contain hundreds of heterogeneous O-GalNAc glycans attached to
the protein scaffold ([Figure
10.1](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f1/?report=objectonly)) and may also carry
a small number of N-glycans. GalNAc O-linked to Ser/Thr is the initiating
sugar of O-GalNAc glycans and is usually extended to form one of four common
core structures ([Table
10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly), [Figure
10.1](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f1/?report=objectonly)). Each core can
subsequently be extended to give a mature linear or branched [O-GalNAc
glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/).

The great variety, density, and clustering of O-GalNAc glycans on mucins
control their chemical, physical, and biological properties. This complexity
often makes it very difficult to assign functions to individual O-GalNAc
glycans at particular attachment sites. Mucins line the epithelial surfaces of
the body, including the gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and respiratory
tracts, where they shield epithelial cells against physical and chemical
damage and protect against infection. Mucins can be antiadhesive and repel
cell-surface interactions or, alternatively, promote adhesion by mediating
recognition of glycan-binding proteins via their O-GalNAc glycans. Mucins have
multiple effects on the immune system and also serve to maintain cellular
homeostasis via signaling mechanisms. Both secreted and membrane-bound mucins
are produced in epithelial cells. Mucins in mucus secretions include large and
polymeric (gel-forming) mucins and smaller, non-gel-forming monomeric mucins.
Goblet cells in the tracheobronchial, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary
tracts are specialized for the production of the large, gel-forming mucins.
These mucins are stored in granules from which they can be quickly secreted on
receiving external stimuli. Mucins also have roles in fertilization. A number
of diseases are associated with abnormal mucin gene expression and abnormal
mucin O-GalNAc glycans. These include cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, and
hypersecretory bronchial and lung diseases. Because O-glycans are hydrophilic
and usually negatively charged, they promote binding of water and salts and
are major contributors to the viscosity and adhesiveness of mucus. In cystic
fibrosis, the abnormally high viscosity of mucus in lungs leads to
obstruction, establishment of infections with pathogenic bacteria, and tissue
malfunction. Transmembrane mucins have a type I topology, with a single
transmembrane domain, an O-glycosylated domain that interacts with the
extracellular space, and a short intracellular cytoplasmic tail at the
carboxyl terminus that interacts with other proteins. Membrane-associated
mucin-like glycoproteins such as P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL-1)
have O-glycosylated regions but are less densely O-glycosylated than mucins.

The first mucin polypeptide gene to be cloned, MUC1, encodes a transmembrane
mucin that is ubiquitous in the epithelium. The levels of MUC1 are usually
high in tumors, in which its glycosylation is often abnormal. A hallmark of
mucins is the presence of numerous “variable number tandem repeat” (VNTR)
regions that carry the majority of the O-GalNAc glycans (50%–80% of the weight
of the molecule) ([Figure
10.1](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f1/?report=objectonly)). VNTRs can vary in
length and composition and are rich in Pro, Thr, and Ser residues that
facilitate O-GalNAc glycosylation. The O-GalNAc glycans expressed on a mucin
are the result of the spectrum of glycosyltransferases that are active in the
cell type producing the mucin. The dense O-glycosylation in the VNTR regions
causes mucin glycoproteins to adopt an extended “bottle brush” conformation
([Figure 10.1](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f1/?report=objectonly)). The dense
glycosylation prevents cleavage by proteases and may also prevent recognition
of protein epitopes by antibodies. Humans have about 20 different mucin genes,
expressed in a tissue-specific fashion, and having different properties. The
mucin genes, their transcripts, the resulting mucin proteins, and the attached
O-GalNAc glycans all show extreme variability.

The O-GalNAc glycans of mucins have four major core structures (cores 1 to 4,
[Table 10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly)). Each core
can be extended ([Figure
10.1](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f1/?report=objectonly)) by a variety of
sugar residues to give linear or branched chains that resemble those on
N-glycans ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) and glycolipids ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Blood group determinants are commonly found in
mucins at nonreducing termini of O-GalNAc glycans. The extension of O-GalNAc
by a β1-3Gal forms the most common (core 1) [O-GalNAc
glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/). Core 2 is formed by the
addition of β1-6GlcNAc to the GalNAc of core 1. Less common core structures
are core 3, in which β1-3GlcNAc is added to O-GalNAc, and core 4, in which
core 3 is branched by the addition of β1-6GlcNAc ([Table
10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly)). Core 1 and 2
O-GalNAc glycans are found in glycoproteins and mucins produced in many
different cell types. However, core 3 and 4 O-GalNAc glycans are more
restricted to mucins and glycoproteins in gastrointestinal and bronchial
tissues.

A single GalNAc residue attached to Ser/Thr forms the Tn antigen. The
unsubstituted core 1 [O-GalNAc glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/ogalnacglycan/) forms the Thomsen-Friedenreich (TF or T antigen).
Although Tn and T antigens are usually cryptic because they are extended by
other sugars, they are found at increased levels in mucins from cancer cells.
They can also carry Sia and form sialyl-Tn or sialyl-T antigens.

O-GalNAc cores are often extended to form complex O-GalNAc glycans. Depending
on the spectrum of biosynthetic enzymes in a cell producing a glycoprotein,
O-GalNAc glycans may include the [ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) and
Lewis blood group determinants, polysialic acid, the linear i antigen
(Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Gal), and the GlcNAc β1-6-branched I antigens ([Table
10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly)). Extensions by type
1 (Galβ1-3GlcNAc) or type 2 (Galβ1-4GlcNAc) units can be repeated and provide
scaffolds for the attachment of additional sugars or functional groups. The
termini of O-GalNAc glycans may contain Fuc and Sia in α-linkages, Gal, GalNAc
and GlcNAc in both α- and β-linkages, and sulfate. Many of these terminal
sugars are antigenic or recognized by lectins. In particular, the sialylated
and sulfated Lewis antigens are ligands for selectins ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), and Gal-terminating structures are ligands for
galectins ([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). Some sugar residues, or their
modifications, may mask underlying antigens or receptors. For example,
O-acetyl groups on the Sia of the sialyl-Tn antigen prevent recognition by
anti-sialyl-Tn antibodies. Gut bacteria may actively remove this mask. Dense
O-glycosylation of mucin domains provides almost complete protection from
protease degradation.

The O-linkage between GalNAc and Ser/Thr residues is labile under alkaline
conditions. Thus, O-GalNAc glycans can be released by a reaction termed
β-elimination (i.e., treatment with 0.1 M sodium hydroxide). The hemiacetal
GalNAc produced will undergo rapid alkali-catalyzed degradation under these
conditions (called peeling) but can be reduced with sodium borohydride to
yield stable _N_ -acetylgalactosaminitol at the reducing end of the released
O-glycan. β-Elimination is the method of choice to release O-glycans from
glycoproteins that also have N-glycans because the latter are not susceptible
to cleavage under mild conditions. O-GalNAc glycans as well as other Ser/Thr-
linked glycans would be released as alditols by β-elimination, but with losses
of labile O-acetyl or sulfate esters. An alternative method that preserves the
reducing end of O-GalNAc uses ammonia followed by boric acid. O-GalNAc that is
not substituted with another sugar can be enzymatically released by an
N-acetylgalactosaminidase. Another glycosidase, termed O-glycanase, releases
only core 1 (Galβ1-3GalNAc-) from Ser/Thr, provided the disaccharide is not
further substituted. Thus, sialidase treatment followed by O-glycanase
releases most simple core 1 O-GalNAc glycans. Terminal Sia residues can also
be easily removed with mild acid treatment. There are no known enzymes that
can release more complex and extended whole O-GalNAc glycans, but mixtures of
exoglycosidases can be used to sequentially remove sugars from O-GalNAc
glycans on a glycoprotein. Glycoproteins with clusters of sialylated O-GalNAc
glycans may be digested by an O-sialoglycoprotein endopeptidase.

Released, intact O-GalNAc glycans may be separated by different
chromatographic methods, including high-performance liquid chromatography
([HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/)).
Chemical derivatization of GalNAc at the reducing end helps in the separation
and subsequent analysis of sugar composition and linkages by gas
chromatography and mass spectrometry ([MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/)) ([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). Another tool
to isolate O-glycans with specific epitopes is affinity chromatography using
lectins. For example, _Helix pomatia_ agglutinin binds to terminal GalNAc,
whereas peanut lectin binds to unsubstituted core 1 ([Figure
10.2](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f2/?report=objectonly)).

The structures of O-GalNAc glycans released from mucins and other
glycoproteins may be determined by a combination of liquid or gas
chromatography, [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/), and
nuclear magnetic resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) spectroscopy. The anomeric linkage of each
sugar can be determined using specific glycosidases that distinguish between
α- or β-linked sugars and by one- and two-dimensional NMR methods ([Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). The sites of [O-GalNAc
glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/) modification in mucins
are difficult to determine directly, but this has been achieved by sensitive
MS methods. However, by deleting the gene encoding core 1 β1-3
galactosyltransferase 1 (T synthase; C1GALT1), or its chaperone COSMC
(C1GALT1C1), the synthesis of all core 1 and core 2 O-GalNAc glycans is
prevented, giving a terminal GalNAc at previous core 1 and core 2 sites.
Glycoproteins or tryptic peptides with only GalNAc at Ser/Thr residues may be
separated on long lectin columns and analyzed by MS or MS/MS, which reveals
each Ser or Thr modified by GalNAc in the glycoproteome.

O-GalNAc glycans are added to protein in the Golgi apparatus. The biosynthetic
glycosyltransferases are type II transmembrane proteins with a short
cytoplasmic tail at the amino terminus directed toward the cytoplasm, a
transmembrane domain, a short stem region, and the catalytic domain in the
lumen of the Golgi. The arrangement within Golgi membranes appears to be
similar to an “assembly line” with early reactions occurring in the _cis_
-Golgi and late reactions in the _trans_ -Golgi ([Chapter
4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)). Many of the enzymes, however, are diffusely
distributed in Golgi compartments. Type II glycosyltransferases are cleaved in
the stem domain by signal peptide-like proteases (SPPLs) and secreted from the
cell, explaining their presence in the circulation.

The subcellular localization, activity levels, and substrate specificities of
glycosyltransferases involved in the assembly of O-GalNAc glycans have a
critical role in determining the range of O-glycans synthesized by a cell
([Table 10.2](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB2/?report=objectonly) and [Figures
10.2](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f2/?report=objectonly) and
[10.3](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f3/?report=objectonly)). In contrast to
the initial reactions of N-glycosylation and O-mannosylation, no lipid-linked
intermediates and no glycosidases appear to be involved in [O-GalNAc
glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/) biosynthesis in which
donor nucleotide sugars are transported into the Golgi from the cytoplasm, and
released nucleotide reaction products are transported out of the Golgi. The
glycosyltransferases that are involved solely in the assembly of mucin
O-GalNAc glycans are listed in [Table
10.2](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB2/?report=objectonly). However, other
enzymes that contribute to the synthesis of N-glycans and glycolipids also act
on O-glycans, and some of these prefer O-glycans as acceptor substrates
([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). In vitro assays have shown that the
activities of glycosyltransferases are controlled by factors such as metal
ions and pH. It is interesting that in vitro assays often do not reflect the
efficient synthesis suggested by the dense complex O-glycosylation found in
mucins. The reason for this may be that glycosyltransferases in the Golgi
exist in a complex with other enzymes in the same pathway, leading to highly
efficient synthesis of complex O-glycans.

The first and essential step of O-GalNAc glycosylation is the addition of
GalNAc in α-linkage to Ser or Thr by a polypeptide GalNAc-transferase (GALNT)
([Table 10.2](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB2/?report=objectonly), [Figure
10.2](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f2/?report=objectonly)). Humans have 20
genes encoding GALNTs. The large number of GALNTs provides redundancy and also
reflects differences in substrate specificity. Studies in the fly indicate
that certain GALNTs are required for normal development, but deletion of
single GALNTs in mammals have to date given only subtle effects in the adult.
The GALNTs are found throughout the animal kingdom but not in bacteria, yeast,
or plants. All GALNTs are classified in the GT27 family with a GT-A fold, and
most have a lectin (ricin-like) domain at the carboxyl terminus, which is
unique among glycosyltransferases. The lectin domain is connected to the
catalytic domain by a linker of 10 to 25 amino acids. O-GalNAc residues remote
from the Ser/Thr to be glycosylated can be recognized by the lectin domain,
which facilitates efficient catalysis at that Ser/Thr. The DXH motif found in
all GALNTs appears to be important in metal ion binding.

Immunohistochemistry of submaxillary glands has shown that some GALNTs
localize to the _cis_ -Golgi. However, studies in cultured cells suggest that
several enzymes of the family are located throughout the Golgi. The first step
of O-GalNAc glycosylation is clearly regulated by the amino acid sequence of
the protein substrate, although a defined sequence of amino acids with a
Ser/Thr that will receive a GalNAc has not been identified. All GALNTs bind
UDP-GalNAc as the donor substrate but they may differ in peptide acceptor
specificities. In vitro assays show that many GALNTs do not efficiently
transfer GalNAc to Ser, but rather to Thr. Pro residues in the vicinity of an
O-glycosylation site have a role in creating a suitable acceptor, either by
causing exposure of hydroxyls to be glycosylated, or by binding to the enzyme
in a Pro-binding motif. An investigation of more than 300 peptide substrates
from experimentally established O-GalNAc sites using 10 recombinant GALNTs in
in vitro assays revealed substantial overlap in the ability of the GALNTs to
transfer O-GalNAc to many peptides. The most ubiquitously expressed GALNT1,
GALNT2, and GALNT3 acted on most peptides, whereas those with restricted
tissue expression were somewhat more selective. Databases that estimate the
likelihood of O-glycosylation at specific sites based on known sequences
around O-glycosylation sites of several hundreds of glycoproteins exist (e.g.,
O-GlycBase and NetOGlyc). However, these predictions do not account for the
different GALNTs expressed in the cell type producing a glycoprotein and do
not apply to mucins. Because of overlapping localization of GALNTs and the
extension enzymes, it is likely that a heterogeneous mixture of different
O-GalNAc glycans is present throughout the biosynthetic pathway and on all
mature glycoproteins. Also, the presence of O-GalNAc glycans on proteins is
likely often missed because of this limited predictive value of amino acid
sequence.

[O-GalNAc glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/) synthesis
begins with the transfer of GalNAc from UDP-GalNAc to Ser or Thr catalyzed by
a polypeptide GalNAc-transferase (GALNT). Although a single unextended GalNAc
linked to Ser or Thr (the Tn antigen) is uncommon in normal mucins, it is
often found at increased levels in tumor mucins. This suggests that the
extension of O-GalNAc glycans beyond the first sugar is blocked in some cancer
cells. Evidence that this blockage facilitates tumorigenesis and/or
progression of solid tumors has been obtained by preventing extension of
O-GalNAc in precancerous cells. Sia added to GalNAc by the α2-6
sialyltransferase ST6GALNAC1 generates the sialyl-Tn antigen, which is common
in advanced tumors. Other sugars are not known to be added to this O-glycan,
but it can be O-acetylated by Sia O-acetyltransferase, which prevents
detection by anti-sialyl-Tn antibodies.

The addition of one or two neutral sugars to O-GalNAc generates one of the
different cores of O-GalNAc glycans ([Table
10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly) and [Figure
10.2](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f2/?report=objectonly)). Core 1
(Galβ1-3GalNAc-O-Ser/Thr) is generated by C1GALT1 ([Table
10.2](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB2/?report=objectonly) and [Figure
10.2](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f2/?report=objectonly)). This activity is
present in most cell types but absolutely requires the molecular chaperone
C1GALT1C1 (COSMC) during synthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to ensure
proper folding and activity in the Golgi. Lack of core 1 synthesis in certain
cell types can be due to either defective C1GALT1 or the absence of functional
C1GALT1C1 and is reflected in high expression of Tn and sialyl-Tn antigens.
For example, Jurkat T cells and colon cancer leukemic stem cells (LSCs) lack
C1GALT1C1, and thus C1GalT1 activity, and have high expression of Tn and
sialyl-Tn antigens.

A GlcNAc β1-6 branch added to the GalNAc residue of core 1 forms core 2
O-GalNAc glycans ([Tables
10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly) and
[10.2](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB2/?report=objectonly), [Figure
10.2](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f2/?report=objectonly)). Core 2 O-GalNAc
glycans are more cell-type specific than the essentially ubiquitous core 1
O-GalNAc glycans, and their expression is highly regulated during activation
of lymphocytes, cytokine stimulation, and embryonic development. Leukemia and
cancer cells and other diseased tissues have abnormal amounts of core 2
O-GalNAc glycans. The enzymes responsible for core 2 synthesis are core 2 β1-6
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases 1, 2, and 3 (C2GnT-1, GCNT1). These
glycosyltransferases do not require divalent cations as cofactors and [X-ray
crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/xraycrystallography/) shows that
positively charged amino acids replace the function of divalent metal ions.
There are two different types of core 2 β1-6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases.
The L-type enzyme (leukocyte type, GCNT1) synthesizes only core 2 O-GalNAc
glycans, whereas the M-type enzyme (mucin type, GCNT3) synthesizes core 4
O-GalNAc glycans ([Table
10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly), [Figure
10.3](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f3/?report=objectonly)). The L-type enzyme
is active in many tissues and cell types, but the M type is found only in
mucin-secreting tissues such as the intestine, stomach, and respiratory
tissues. The expression and activity of both the L and M types are altered in
certain tumors. The synthesis of core 2 O-GalNAc glycans has been correlated
with tumor metastasis, possibly because of selectin ligands that are
preferentially assembled on core 2 O-GalNAc glycans and that facilitate egress
from the circulation ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).

The synthesis of core 3 O-GalNAc glycans appears to be restricted mostly to
mucus epithelia from the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts and to
salivary glands. The enzyme responsible is core 3 β1-3
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 6 (C3GnT6; B3GNT6) ([Table
10.2](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB2/?report=objectonly), [Figure
10.3](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f3/?report=objectonly)). The enzyme has low
in vitro activity but must be highly efficient in vivo because colonic mucins
are rich in core 3 O-GalNAc glycans. The expression and activity of B3GNT6 is
especially low in colonic tumors and virtually absent from tumor cells in
culture. Overexpression of the enzyme in colon cancer cells decreases their
ability to metastasize. Mice deficient in B3GNT6 show increased susceptibility
to colitis and tumor development. The synthesis of core 4 by the M-type GCNT3
requires the prior synthesis of a core 3 [O-GalNAc
glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/) ([Figure
10.3](/books/NBK453030/figure/ch10.f3/?report=objectonly)). Transfection of
colon cancer cells HCT116 with GCNT3 suppresses cell growth and invasive
properties. In a xenograft model in nude mice, transfection with GCNT3 also
suppresses tumor growth. Thus, both core 3 and 4 O-GalNAc glycans repress
tumor progression, although the mechanisms of repression are not clear.

The elongation of O-GalNAc glycans is catalyzed by families of β1-3 GlcNAc-
transferases and β1-3 and β1-4 Gal-transferases to form repeated type 1 and 2
poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamines ([Table
10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly)). Although most of
the extension enzymes act on a number of different glycans, core 3 is a
preferred acceptor for β3GalT5 (B3GALT5). In addition, the Galβ1-3 residues of
core 1 and 2 O-GalNAc glycans are preferred substrates for the elongation
enzyme β1-3 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 3 (β3GlcNAcT-3, B3GNT3). Less
common elongation reactions are the formation of GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc (LacdiNAc)
and Galβ1-3GlcNAc- sequences. Linear poly-[ _N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/) units
can be branched by members of the β1-6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase family
(e.g., GCNT2), resulting in the I antigen ([Table
10.2](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB2/?report=objectonly)). Most of these
elongation and branching reactions also occur on O- and N-glycans and
glycolipids.

Some sialyltransferases and sulfotransferases prefer O-GalNAc glycans as
substrates but many of these enzymes have an overlapping specificity and also
act on N-glycans. A family of α2-6 sialyltransferases (ST6GALNACI to
ST6GALNAC4) with distinct specificities synthesize sialyl-Tn and sialylated
core 1 O-GalNAc glycans. A family of α2-3 sialyltransferases is responsible
for the synthesis of sialylated O-GalNAc glycans, with ST3GAL1 being mainly
involved in the sialylation of the Galβ1-3 residue of core 1 and 2 O-GalNAc
glycans. Sialylation blocks the further linear extension of O-glycan chains.

Sulfotransferases are localized in the Golgi and cap O-GalNAc glycans with a
sulfate ester linked to the 3-position of Gal or the 6-position of GlcNAc. The
sulfate group is transferred from 3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate
(PAPS). This adds a negative charge to O-GalNAc glycans of lung, intestinal,
and other mucins that has a considerable effect on the chemical and metal ion
binding properties of these glycans. GAL3ST4 is the major sulfotransferase
acting on the Gal residue of core 1 O-glycans. Skeletal type keratan sulfate
(KS) is also an O-GalNAc-linked highly sulfated polysaccharide ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). O-acetyltransferases that add O-acetyl esters to
one or more hydroxyl groups of Sia residues remain poorly characterized. Some
evidence suggests that the esters can be added to CMP-Sias before transfer.

The α1-2 fucosyltransferases FUT1 and FUT2 synthesize the blood group H
determinant of O-GalNAc glycans which can be converted by an α1-3 Gal-
transferase to blood group B or by an α1-3 GalNAc-transferase to blood group A
([Table 10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly)). In
addition, α1-3 and α1-3/4 fucosyltransferases synthesize the Lewis antigens
([Table 10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly)). A number of
uncommon and antigenic sugars are also found on O-GalNAc glycans. For example,
neuropilin-2 found in the nervous system has core 1 and 2 O-GalNAc glycans
that carry polysialic acid residues synthesized by polysialytransferase IV
(PST; ST8SIA4). These highly charged glycans play a critical role in the
negative regulation of cell adhesion during maturation of the nervous system.
An α1-4 GlcNAc-transferase from gastric tissue adds GlcNAc in α1-4 linkage to
β1-4 Gal in core 1 and 2 O-GalNAc glycans. The GlcNAc α1-4 glycans appear to
inhibit colonization by _Helicobacter pylori_.

The functions of O-GalNAc glycans are many and varied. Mucins that have
hundreds of complex O-GalNAc glycans provide a barrier for a wide range of
intestinal microbes. O-GalNAc glycans can contribute to the conformation and
exposure of peptide epitopes and the adhesive properties of mucins and
glycoproteins. Selectins and galectins recognize O-GalNAc glycans, which play
a role in the innate immune system.

Methods to determine [O-GalNAc glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/ogalnacglycan/) functions include the use of biosynthetic inhibitors, the
construction of cell lines that lack or overexpress specific enzymes in
O-glycosylation pathways, the use of O-GalNAc glycan-specific lectins or
antibodies, or removal of specific sugar residues by glycosidases. For
example, a critical role of O-GalNAc glycans in selectin-mediated cell
adhesion was revealed by treating cells with GalNAc-O-benzyl. This
“O-glycosylation extension inhibitor” is a competitive substrate of core 1 and
core 3 synthesis. Thus, treatment with GalNAc-O-benzyl causes a reduction of
all O-GalNAc glycans on glycoproteins, which instead are synthesized on the
GalNAc-O-benzyl acceptor. Inhibitor-treated cancer cells lose the ability to
bind to E-selectin and endothelial cells in vitro. The ligands for certain
selectin-mediated interactions between endothelial cells and leukocytes
require sialyl Lewis x that is commonly attached to core 2 O-GalNAc glycans
([Table 10.1](/books/NBK453030/table/CH10TB1/?report=objectonly)). This
selectin–glycan interaction is important for the attachment of leukocytes to
the capillary endothelium during homing of lymphocytes or the extravasation of
leukocytes during the inflammatory response ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Cancer cells often express sialyl Lewis x and may
thus use the selectin-binding properties of their cell surface as a mechanism
to invade tissues. O-GalNAc glycans change during lymphocyte activation and
are abnormal in leukemic and tumor cells.

Cell lines defective in specific O-glycosylation pathways or cells specially
engineered to express altered O-GalNAc glycans, as well as mice with targeted
mutations, are excellent models to study roles of O-GalNAc glycosylation.
Cells lacking C1GALT1C1 have been developed to identify a partial O-GalNAc
proteome (i.e., the specific locations of core 1or core 2 O-GalNAc glycans in
the glycoproteome). The same approach has identified roles for core 1 and core
2 O-GalNAc glycans in cell transformation and cancer cell progression. Mice
lacking C1GALT1, and thus lacking core 1 and core 2 O-GalNAc glycans, die
during embryogenesis because of defective angiogenesis and hemorrhaging,
whereas mice lacking core 3 O-GalNAc glycans develop colitis and are also
prone to develop colorectal tumors.

Although knocking out a single polypeptide GalNAc transferase does not result
in an obvious phenotype in mice, glycosyltransferases specific to O-GalNAc
glycans are associated with human disease. For example, GALNT3 is responsible
for adding a GalNAc residue to Thr178 in the phosphate-regulating factor
FGF23. A deficiency in GALNT3 leads to decreased circulation of FGF23 and
aberrant phosphate homeostasis. Plasma lipid levels appear to be regulated by
GALNT2 levels, and a deficiency of GALNT2 is associated with cardiovascular
disease. Loss of GALNT11 causes heterotaxy because of the loss of O-GalNAc on
NOTCH1 leading to alterations in motile versus immotile cilia and affecting
laterality.

Because of the association of increased levels of Tn, sialyl-Tn, and T
antigens with cancer, vaccines containing these structures on mucin fragments
have been synthesized as mimics of cancer cell O-GalNAc glycans, and have
shown moderate success. MUC1 is a prime candidate for immunization in cancer
as it is overexpressed and has mostly short O-GalNAc glycans in
adenocarcinomas. Thus, in breast cancer MUC1, the chains are relatively short
and sialylated, with Tn and sialyl-Tn being prominent. However, to be
effective, the glycosylation should be the same as in the cancer cells to be
immunized against. A fully synthetic linear MUC1 glycopeptide immunogen
reported recently is a promising vaccine candidate. The sialyl-Tn antigen has
also been shown to play a role in the metastatic process and may therefore be
a suitable target antigen to prevent metastasis. O-GalNAc glycans are also
potential markers for diagnosis and prognosis of cancers. For example the
CA125 antigen is a glycosylated mucin circulating in serum that is used as a
diagnostic and prognostic marker, particularly in ovarian cancer.
Understanding the full range of O-GalNAc glycans produced and identifying
specific [O-GalNAc glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/)
pathway members associated with disease will continue to reveal potential
therapeutic targets and useful diagnostic and prognostic tools.

The authors acknowledge the contribution of Harry Schachter to previous
versions of this chapter. The authors appreciate helpful comments and
suggestions from Harry Schachter, Jenny H.L. Chik, Frederico Alisson da Silva,
and Chengcheng Huang.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.011

Glycosphingolipids (GSLs), a subclass of glycolipids found in the cell
membranes of organisms from bacteria to humans, are the major glycolipids of
animals. The emphasis of this chapter is on vertebrate glycosphingolipids.
Information on glycolipids of fungi, plants, and invertebrates is covered
elsewhere ([Chapters 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/) and
[23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)–[26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)), as are
glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs), glycolipids attached to proteins as
membrane anchors ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). This chapter describes
the characteristic features of GSLs, pathways for their biosynthesis, and
insights into their biological roles in membrane structure, host–pathogen
interactions, cell–cell recognition, and modulation of membrane protein
function.

The first glycosphingolipid (GSL) to be characterized was galactosylceramide
(GalCer). Among the simplest of glycolipids, it is also one of the most
abundant molecules in the vertebrate brain. It consists of a single galactose
residue in glycosidic linkage to the C-1 hydroxyl group of a lipid moiety
called ceramide ([Figure
11.1](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f1/?report=objectonly)). When its structure
was deduced in 1884, the lipid moiety was particularly novel, consisting of a
long-chain amino alcohol in amide linkage to a fatty acid ([Figure
11.1](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f1/?report=objectonly)). The structure was
so difficult to determine that the amino alcohol was dubbed “sphingosine”
after the enigmatic Egyptian Sphinx, “in commemoration of the many enigmas
which it presented to the inquirer.” We now know that nearly all glycolipids
in vertebrates are GSLs, which, in turn, are part of the larger family of
sphingolipids (lipids having ceramide as their core structure) that includes
the major membrane phospholipid, sphingomyelin. Other GSLs were later
identified because they accumulate to pathological levels in tissues of
patients suffering from lysosomal storage diseases, genetic disorders in which
the enzymes that degrade glycans are faulty or missing ([Chapter
44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). For example, a sialic acid–containing GSL (GM2)
was first isolated from the brain of a victim of Tay–Sachs disease, in which
it accumulates, and was named “ganglioside” based on its location in nerve
clusters or “ganglion” in the brain. Likewise, glucosylceramide (GlcCer) was
first isolated from the spleen of a Gaucher disease patient where it
accumulates. As purification, separation, and analytical techniques improved,
GSLs were found in all vertebrate tissues. Hundreds of unique GSL structures
have been found that vary in glycan structures alone—and many more when lipid
variations are taken into account.

Glycoglycerolipids are distinguished from GSLs by their lipid moieties, having
glycans linked to the C-3 hydroxyl of diacylglycerol ([Figure
11.1](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f1/?report=objectonly)). These are very
minor constituents of most animal tissues (other than the testes) but are
widely distributed in microbes and plants. Information on glycolipids of
fungi, plants, and invertebrates is covered elsewhere in this volume
([Chapters 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/) and
[23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)–[26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)).
Glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs), a different family of glycolipids that
covalently attach to proteins and serve as membrane anchors, are discussed in
[Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/). The lipopolysaccharides of Gram-negative
bacteria are discussed in [Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/).

The ceramide lipid component of GSLs consists of a sphingoid base with a fatty
acid amide at the C-2 amine. [Sphingosine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/sphingosine/) is the most common of these in mammals, with hydroxyls at
the C-1 and C-3 carbons and a double bond between C-4 and C-5 ([Figure
11.1](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f1/?report=objectonly)). Sphinganine is the
same structure without the double bond, and phytosphingosine lacks the double
bond and has an additional hydroxyl on C-4. Ceramides containing sphinganine
and phytosphingosine are rare in animals, whereas phytosphingosine is
prominent in the glycosphingolipids of plants and fungi. The fatty acid
components of ceramides vary widely, with lengths ranging from C14 to C30 or
greater. Although often saturated, they may be variably unsaturated or have
α-hydroxyl groups. [Ceramide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ceramide/)
structures modulate membrane associations and functions of GSLs.

Although ceramide variations add diversity to GSL structures, major structural
and functional classifications are based on the glycans. The first sugars
linked to ceramide in “higher” animals are typically β-linked galactose
(GalCer) or glucose (GlcCer). GalCer and its analog sulfatide, with sulfate at
the C-3 hydroxyl of galactose, are the major glycans in the brain, where they
have essential roles in the structure and function of myelin, the insulator
that allows for rapid nerve conduction. Interestingly, the related
sulfogalactoglycerolipid, seminolipid ([Figure
11.1](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f1/?report=objectonly)), is abundant only
in the male reproductive tract, where it is essential for spermatogenesis.
Sialylated GalCer (Neu5Acα2-3GalβCer; GM4) is also found in myelin. These
galactolipids are seldom extended with larger saccharide chains; rather, most
other members of the large and diverse family of GSLs in animals are built on
GlcCer ([Figure 11.2](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f2/?report=objectonly)).
GlcCer itself is abundant in certain tissues. In skin, it is a precursor of
ceramide that is required for creating the essential surface water barrier
(see below).

The vast majority of GSL structures are classified based on seven common
tetrasaccharide neutral sugar core sequences ([Figure
11.2](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f2/?report=objectonly)). GSLs sharing the
same neutral core sequence are said to be of that “series”; the quantitatively
major series in vertebrates are ganglio, globo, and neolacto series, whereas
in invertebrates the mollu and arthro series predominate.

GSL series are expressed in tissue-specific patterns. In mammals, for example,
ganglio-series GSLs, although broadly distributed, predominate in the brain,
whereas neolacto-series glycolipids are common on certain hematopoietic cells
including leukocytes. In contrast, lacto-series glycolipids are prominent in
secretory organs and globo-series glycolipids are the most abundant in
erythrocytes. This diversity presumably reflects important differences in GSL
functions.

GSLs are further subclassified as neutral (no charged sugars or ionic groups),
sialylated (having one or more sialic acid residues), or sulfated.
Traditionally, all sialylated GSLs are known as “gangliosides,” regardless of
whether they are based on the ganglio-series neutral sugar core. In the
official nomenclature, saccharide and other substituents that extend or branch
from the neutral core structures are indicated by a roman numeral designating
which of the neutral core sugars carries the substituent (counting the sugar
closest to the ceramide as “I”), and a superscript designating which hydroxyl
on that sugar is modified ([Figure
11.2](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f2/?report=objectonly)). This nomenclature
is too complex for daily use, so the most common GSLs are usually referred to
by unofficial names. For example, in the widely used nomenclature of
Svennerholm, the ganglioside Galβ1-3GalNAcβ1-4(Neu5Acα2-3)Galβ1-4GlcβCer is
designated “GM1” ([Figure
11.3](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f3/?report=objectonly)). In this
nomenclature, G refers to ganglioside series, the second letter refers to the
number of sialic acid residues (mono, di, tri, etc.), and the number (1, 2, 3,
etc.) refers to the order of migration of the ganglioside on thin-layer
chromatography (TLC) (e.g., GM3 > GM2 > GM1).

Organic solvents are used to extract glycolipids from tissues and cells, where
they are found primarily in the external leaflet of plasma membranes.
Extraction procedures, most often using defined chloroform–methanol–water
mixtures, are optimized to precipitate and remove proteins and nucleic acids
while maximizing solubilization of GSLs (along with other lipids). Because
GSLs aggregate with one another and other lipids in aqueous solution, organic
solvents are used throughout subsequent purification steps, which typically
involve solvent partition, ion-exchange, and adsorption chromatographies.

Because of their amphipathic nature, glycolipids are well suited for TLC
analysis, which is useful for monitoring their purification, qualitative and
quantitative determination of their expression in normal and diseased tissues,
partial structural analysis, and detecting biological activities including
immunoreactivity and binding activity toward toxins, viruses, bacteria, and
eukaryotic cells. After separation by TLC, picomole to nanomole quantities of
glycolipids can be chemically detected with orcinol reagent for hexoses and
with resorcinol-HCl reagent for sialic acid. To study glycolipid receptors,
TLC-resolved glycolipids are overlaid with potential binding proteins or
organisms (e.g., antibodies, lectins, toxins, viruses, bacteria, or cells).
After washing, glycolipid species that bind can be identified by detection of
the bound material at precise positions on the TLC plate. Two-dimensional TLC
with exposure to ammonia vapor after the first dimension can be useful in
identifying the presence of O-acetyl modifications on sialic acids, which are
especially common in the brain.

Complete structural analyses of glycolipids require a combination of
techniques to determine the composition, sequence, linkage positions, and
anomeric configurations of the glycan moiety and the fatty acid and long-chain
base of the ceramide moiety. [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/)
composition is determined by hydrolysis and analysis of the released
monosaccharides. [Mass spectrometry](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/) (MS) of underivatized GSLs or of their permethylated
derivatives is a powerful tool for sequence determination and ceramide
identification and can sometimes be performed directly from the TLC plate.
However, the methylation process causes destruction of labile substitutions
like O-acetyl esters. Linkage determination is most rigorously performed by
methylation analysis, and anomeric configurations can be obtained by nuclear
magnetic resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) spectroscopy. Information on glycan
sequence, linkage, and anomeric configuration can also be obtained by
combining enzymatic hydrolysis using specific glycosidases with TLC. Intact
glycans are released from many GSLs enzymatically using ceramide glycanases or
endoglycoceramidases. The resulting oligosaccharides can be analyzed using the
methods described in [Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/). Last, but not least,
there are many monoclonal antibodies specific for detection of particular
glycosphingolipids.

[Glycosphingolipid](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosphingolipid/)
biosynthesis occurs in a stepwise fashion, with an individual sugar added
first to ceramide and then subsequent sugars transferred by
glycosyltransferases from nucleotide sugar donors.
[Ceramide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ceramide/) is synthesized on the
cytoplasmic face of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER); it subsequently
equilibrates to the luminal face and traffics to the Golgi compartment. GlcCer
is synthesized on the cytoplasmic face of the ER and early Golgi apparatus; it
then flips into the Golgi lumen, where it is typically elongated by a series
of glycosyltransferases. In contrast, GalCer is synthesized on the lumenal
face of the ER and then traffics through the Golgi, where it may be sulfated
to form sulfatide. In both cases, the final orientation of GSLs during
biosynthesis is consistent with their nearly exclusive appearance on the outer
leaflet of the plasma membrane, facing the extracellular milieu. Although
ceramide resides on intracellular organelles, such as mitochondria, GSLs
beyond GlcCer are not typically found on membranes facing the cytoplasm,
although they appear in the nucleus.

The biosynthesis of GSLs in the brain provides an example of how competing
biosynthetic pathways can lead to glycan structural diversity ([Figure
11.3](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f3/?report=objectonly)). Stepwise
biosynthesis of GalCer and sulfatide occurs in oligodendrocytes, the cells
that elaborate myelin. Gangliosides, in contrast, are synthesized by all
cells, with concentrations of the different forms varying according to cell
type. Expression patterns of GSLs are determined by the expression and
intracellular distribution of the enzymes required for their biosynthesis. In
some cases, multiple glycosyltransferases compete for the same GSL precursor
([Figure 11.3](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f3/?report=objectonly)). For
example, the ganglioside GM3 may be acted on by
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase, thereby forming GM2, the simplest of the
“a-series” gangliosides, or by sialyltransferase, thereby forming GD3, the
simplest of the “b-series” gangliosides. Each branch is a committed pathway,
because sialyltransferases cannot directly convert a-series gangliosides
(beyond GM3) to their corresponding b-series gangliosides. Because of this
branch exclusivity, competition between two enzymes at a key branch point
determines the relative expression levels of the final GSL products. The
transfer of _N_ -acetylgalactosamine to a-, b-, and c-series gangliosides,
transforming GM3 into GM2, GD3 into GD2, or GT3 into GT2, is catalyzed by the
same N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase. Likewise, the transfer of galactose to
GM2 to form GM1, to GD2 to form GD1b, or to GT2 to form GT1c is accomplished
by a single galactosyltransferase. The levels of nucleotide sugar donors used
by glycosyltransferases in the Golgi lumen (including UDP-Gal, UDP-Glc, UDP-
GlcNAc, UDP-GalNAc, and CMP-Neu5Ac) ultimately affect the final structure of
glycans and are regulated by synthetic enzymes in the cytoplasm or nucleus and
by the activity of nucleotide sugar transporters in the Golgi membrane
([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). The sialic acids of human gangliosides
are exclusively in the form of _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) and its
O-acetylated derivatives, but those of many other mammals contain both Neu5Ac
and _N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc). This is due to a specific mutation
in humans of the enzyme that hydroxylates CMP-Neu5Ac to form CMP-Neu5Gc. Even
in animals with predominantly Neu5Gc in the gangliosides of nonneural tissues,
their brain gangliosides have nearly exclusively Neu5Ac. [Sialic
acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) on gangliosides may be
further modified by O-acetylation or removal of the N-acyl group, to generate
a free amino group ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

An additional level of regulation occurs via stable association of different
GSL glycosyltransferases into “multiglycosyltransferase” complexes. The
multiple enzymes are thought to act concertedly on the growing GSL without
releasing intermediate structures, ensuring progression to the preferred end
product.

Although the enzymes that catalyze the initial steps in GSL biosynthesis are
specific and used only for GSL biosynthesis, outer sugars, such as the
outermost sialic acid, fucose, or glucuronic acid residues, are sometimes
added by glycosyltransferases that also act on glycoproteins, resulting in
terminal structures being shared by GSL and glycoprotein glycans ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). One example is the blood group
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) antigen system. The α1-3
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase encoded by the blood group A gene produces
the blood group A determinant GalNAcα1-3(Fucα1-2)Galβ on glycoproteins and
glycolipids. Correspondingly, the α1-3 galactosyltransferase encoded by the
allelic blood group B gene transfers galactose to both glycoproteins and
glycolipids.

Major brain ganglioside structures are highly conserved among all mammals and
birds. In contrast, differences in blood cell glycolipids are well known even
among humans, as in the case of the [ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/),
Lewis, and P blood group antigens ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)).
Species differences among glycolipids also occur, one example being the
expression of Forssman antigen, GalNAcα1-3GalNAcβ1-3Galα1-4Galβ1-4GlcβCer.
This molecule is a good immunogen in Forssman antigen–negative species, such
as rabbit, rat, and human, which have a mutated α1-3
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase that cannot transfer _N_
-acetylgalactosamine to the precursor Gb4Cer. In contrast, guinea pig, mouse,
sheep, and goat are Forssman antigen–positive.

The breakdown of GSLs occurs stepwise by the action of lysosomal hydrolases.
GSLs on the outer surface of the plasma membrane are internalized, along with
other membrane components, in invaginated vesicles that then fuse with
endosomes, resulting in the GSL glycan facing the endosome lumen. GSL-enriched
areas of the endosomal membrane may then invaginate once again to form
multivesicular bodies within the endosome. When endosomes fuse with primary
lysosomes, GSLs become exposed to lysosomal hydrolases. Absence of any one of
these glycosidases results in lysosomal storage diseases ([Chapter
44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)).

As GSLs are successively cleaved to smaller structures, the remaining “core”
monosaccharides become inaccessible to the water-soluble lysosomal hydrolases
and require assistance from activator proteins that are referred to as
“liftases.” These include GM2-activator protein and four structurally related
saposins, all of which are derived from a single polypeptide precursor by
proteolytic cleavage. Saposins are thought to bind to their glycolipid
substrate, disrupt its interaction with the local membrane environment, and
facilitate access of the glycans to hydrolytic enzymes. In certain lysosomal
storage diseases ([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)), mutations in activator
proteins result in pathological accumulation of glycolipids, even though there
is an abundance of the hydrolase responsible for degradation, thus
demonstrating the essential role of activator proteins in GSL catabolism in
vivo. GSLs are eventually broken down to their individual components, which
are then available for reuse.

GSLs comprise from <5% (erythrocytes) to >20% (myelin) of the total membrane
lipids in the plasma membranes of cells in “higher” animals. However, they are
not uniformly distributed in the plane of the membrane but cluster in “lipid
rafts,” small lateral microdomains of self-associating membrane molecules.
Although the precise structure and makeup of lipid rafts is a matter of
ongoing debate, their outer leaflets are believed to be enriched in
sphingolipids, including GSLs and sphingomyelin (the phosphocholine derivative
of ceramide). The self-association of sphingolipids is driven by the unique
biophysical properties afforded by their long unsaturated carbon chains
([Figure 11.1](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f1/?report=objectonly)). Besides
sphingolipids, lipid rafts are enriched in cholesterol and selected proteins,
including GPI-anchored proteins and some transmembrane signaling proteins such
as receptor tyrosine kinases. On the cytoplasmic side, acylated proteins, such
as Src family protein tyrosine kinases and Gα subunits of G proteins associate
with lipid rafts.

[Lipid rafts](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/lipidrafts/) are apparently small
(10–50 nm in diameter), each containing perhaps hundreds of lipid molecules
along with a few protein molecules. It has been argued that external
clustering of lipid rafts into larger structures might bring signaling
molecules such as kinases and their substrates together to initiate
intracellular signaling. Thus, GSLs may act as intermediaries in the flow of
information from the outside to the inside of cells. This idea is supported by
the observation that antibody-induced GSL clustering activates lipid-raft-
associated signaling and has led to the concept of plasma membrane
“glycosignaling domains” or “glycosynapse.” Interactions between glycans and
glycan-binding proteins, as well as glycan–glycan interactions, are also very
much influenced by the density of glycans in terms of binding affinity.
Multiple glycans clustered in a limited area can increase the avidity of
cognate binding proteins compared with a single molecule of a glycan ([Chapter
29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)). Natural multivalency adds unique functional
properties to plasma membrane glycolipids. Indeed, several growth factor
receptors including the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, insulin
receptor, and the nerve growth factor receptor are localized in membrane
microdomains, and evidence indicates that their signaling functions are
modulated by glycolipids.

GSLs are primarily expressed in the outer leaflet of the limiting plasma
membrane of cells, with their glycans facing the external milieu. Their
functions fall into two major categories: mediating cell–cell interactions via
binding to complementary molecules on apposing plasma membranes ( _trans_
recognition) and modulating activities of proteins in the same plasma membrane
( _cis_ regulation).

At the single-cell level, GSLs are not essential for life. Using specific
chemical inhibitors and genetic ablation of biosynthetic genes, cells without
GSLs survive, proliferate, and even differentiate. However, GSLs are required
for development at the whole-animal level. Mice engineered to lack the gene
for GlcCer synthesis fail to develop, with arrest occurring just past the
gastrula stage because of extensive apoptosis in the embryo. These and other
recent observations lead to a basic principle: GSLs mediate and modulate
intercellular coordination in multicellular organisms. Sometimes this occurs
in quite subtle ways, as exemplified by the role of GalCer and sulfatide in
myelination.

GalCer and its 3-O-sulfated derivative, sulfatide, are predominant glycans in
the brain, where they constitute >50% of the total glycoconjugates. In the
brain, they are expressed by oligodendrocytes, which elaborate myelin, the
multilayered membrane insulation that ensheathes nerve axons. GalCer and
sulfatide constitute >20% of myelin lipids and were widely believed to be
essential to myelin structure. This turned out to be true, but in a much more
subtle way than anticipated. Mice engineered to lack the enzyme responsible
for GalCer synthesis (UDP-Gal:ceramide β-galactosyltransferase) do not make
any GalCer or sulfatide. However, they myelinate axons, and the myelin appears
grossly normal. Nevertheless, the mice show all the signs of failed
myelination, including tremor, ataxia, slow nerve conduction, and early death.
In both normal and mutant mice, myelination occurs in short stretches along
axons, with intermittent gaps called “nodes of Ranvier,” where concentrated
ion channels pass nerve impulses along to the next gap. At the edge of the
node, myelin membranes normally curve downward and attach to the axon to seal
off the node. In animals lacking GalCer and sulfatide, these myelin “end feet”
fail to attach to the axon, instead turning upward, away from the axon. The
result is a faulty node of Ranvier, with ion channels and adhesion molecules
in disarray. Without the proper structure at the node of Ranvier, rapid nerve
conduction is disrupted. A similar phenotype is shared by mice lacking the
enzyme that adds the sulfate group to GalCer to make sulfatide. The conclusion
is that sulfatide is essential for myelin–axon interactions, and its absence
results in severe neurological deficits.

A key function of GlcCer has been learned from studies on its catabolism in
postnatal animals. [Ceramide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ceramide/) is a key
component of the outer layer of the skin and is responsible for the epidermal
permeability barrier—a key defense against dehydration. Infants with severe
Gaucher disease, in which β-glucocerebrosidase activity is nearly absent and
GlcCer is not catabolized, are prone to dehydration because of high skin
permeability. The relationship among GlcCer, ceramide, and skin permeability
was confirmed in mice engineered with the same mutation in
β-glucocerebrosidase as found in these infants. The mice unable to catabolize
GlcCer died within days of birth by dehydration through the skin. This
established the role of GlcCer as the obligate precursor to the ceramide
required to build the outermost protective layer (stratum corneum) of the
skin. GlcCer is synthesized, transported to the stratum corneum, and then
enzymatically hydrolyzed, resulting in ceramide deposition.

More complex GSLs function both in cell–cell recognition and in the regulation
of signal transduction. As with sulfatide, these functions are sometimes
subtle, as exemplified by the effects of blocking ganglioside biosynthesis on
nervous system physiology. Given the complexity of complex ganglioside
biosynthesis ([Figure
11.3](/books/NBK453016/figure/ch11.f3/?report=objectonly)), it was surprising
to discover that major alterations in ganglioside expression resulted in only
modest phenotypic changes in mice. When the N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
responsible for ganglioside elongation (GM2/GD2 synthase) was inactivated in
mice, none of the major complex gangliosides (GM1, GD1a, GD1b, or GT1b) were
expressed, and a comparable concentration of the simple gangliosides GM3 and
GD3 were found in the adult brain. The resulting mice were grossly normal, but
as they aged, mice without the normal spectrum of brain gangliosides displayed
signs of axon degeneration and demyelination, hallmarks of a problem in
myelin–axon cell–cell communication. These deficits may arise from altered
interactions of GM2/GD2 with a well-characterized protein on the myelin
membrane, myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), a member of the Siglec family
of sialic acid–dependent carbohydrate-binding proteins ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). MAG is expressed on the innermost myelin wrap,
directly across from the axon surface. Mice engineered to lack MAG have some
of the same phenotypic changes as mice lacking GM2/GD2 synthase, and
biochemical and cell-biological studies showed that the major brain
gangliosides GD1a and GT1b are excellent ligands for MAG. These results
support the conclusion that MAG on the innermost myelin membrane binds to GD1a
and GT1b on the axon cell surface to stabilize myelin–axon interactions.
Genetic disruption of MAG or its target gangliosides results in similar long-
term destabilization of axons and myelin. Disruption of the same ganglioside
biosynthetic gene in humans leads to a similar phenotype: hereditary spastic
paraplegia.

A second _trans_ recognition role for GSLs appears to be in the interaction of
leukocytes with the blood vessel wall during the process of inflammation, the
body's protection against bacterial infection. As discussed in [Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/), the first step in inflammation is the binding of
white blood cells (leukocytes) to the endothelial cells lining the blood
vessel near sites of infection (activated endothelium). This cell–cell
interaction is initiated when glycan-binding proteins of the selectin family,
expressed on the activated endothelium, bind to complementary glycans on the
surface of passing leukocytes. One of the selectins, E-selectin, binds to as-
yet-undetermined targets on human leukocytes. The receptor(s) are resistant to
protease treatment, indicating that they may be GSLs. A candidate class of
GSLs, myeloglycans, has been identified in leukocytes. The candidate GSLs have
long sugar chains consisting of a neutral core with Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3 repeats
([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)), substituted with a terminal sialic acid
and fucose residues on one or more of the _N_ -acetylglucosamine residues.
Although the data are intriguing, the role of these minor GSLs in inflammation
has yet to be established.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells, which carry both T- and NK-cell receptors, are
involved in the suppression of autoimmune reactions, cancer metastasis, and
the graft rejection response. The MHC class I molecule (CD1d) of dendritic
cells presents glycolipid antigens via T-cell receptor recognition to activate
NKT cells. NKT cells can be activated by nonmammalian Galα-ceramide as well as
the isoglobo-series GSL iGb3Cer (Galα1-3Galβ1-4GlcβCer), which has been
proposed as an endogenous NKT activator.

In addition to their action as _trans_ recognition molecules, GSLs also
interact laterally with proteins in the same membrane to modulate their
activities ( _cis_ regulation). Notable among these _cis_ regulatory
interactions are those between gangliosides and members of the receptor
tyrosine kinase family. Gangliosides regulate the activity of the EGF
receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, fibroblast growth factor
receptor, TrkA neurotrophin receptor, and insulin receptor.
[Ganglioside](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ganglioside/) GM3, for example,
down-regulates the response of the insulin receptor to insulin. Mice
engineered to lack the enzyme responsible for the biosynthesis of GM3 display
increased insulin receptor phosphorylation, enhanced glucose tolerance, and
enhanced insulin sensitivity and are less susceptible to induced insulin
resistance. These data implicate GM3 in the regulation of insulin
responsiveness and support other data demonstrating the modulation of various
receptors by gangliosides residing in the same membrane ( _cis_ regulation).

Mutations in glycosphingolipid biosynthetic genes are exceedingly rare in
humans, perhaps because of their devastating effects ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). Mutations in a gene required for biosynthesis of
ganglioside GM3, _ST3GAL5_ , result in severe infantile seizures accompanied
by profound motor and intellectual deficits. Mutations in another ganglioside-
specific biosynthetic gene, _B4GALNT1_ , responsible for biosynthesis of GM2
and GD2, are less severe, resulting in hereditary spastic paraplegia
accompanied by intellectual disability. Mutations in GSL degradation genes,
which are also rare, cause GSL storage diseases that lead to the accumulation
of GSLs in lysosomes. They typically result from mutations in glycosidases,
and less frequently from mutations in activator proteins ([Chapter
44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). The symptoms depend on the tissues in which the
unhydrolyzed GSL accumulates and on the extent of loss of enzyme activity. The
most common GSL storage disease is Gaucher disease, which is caused by
mutations in the enzyme β-glucocerebrosidase, resulting in the accumulation of
GlcCer in the liver and spleen (and other tissues in more severe cases).
Enzyme replacement therapy has been successful in treating Gaucher disease,
and drugs to block GlcCer synthesis (“substrate reduction therapy”) are in
clinical use ([Chapter 55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)). Recombinant
β-glucocerebrosidase produced in genetically engineered mutant (Lec1) CHO
cells and thereby carrying only oligomannose N-glycans ([Chapter
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)) are the latest treatment for Gaucher disease. Such
modified enzyme molecules are efficiently taken up by the same phagocytic
cells in which GlcCer accumulates. Another example, Tay–Sachs disease, is
caused by mutations in a β-hexosaminidase and results in the buildup of GM2,
culminating in irreversible fatal deterioration of brain function.
Unfortunately, enzyme replacement delivery to the brain has not yet been
successfully developed. [Glycosphingolipid](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycosphingolipid/) storage and related diseases are considered more
extensively in [Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/).

Anti-GSL antibodies are involved in certain autoimmune diseases. Some forms of
Guillain–Barré syndrome, the most common form of paralytic disease worldwide,
clearly involve autoantibodies against gangliosides. One form of
Guillain–Barré syndrome occurs subsequent to infection with particular strains
of the common diarrheal bacterial agent _Campylobacter jejuni_. For unknown
reasons, these bacteria produce near-exact replicas of brain ganglioside
glycans (such as GD1a) attached to their lipopolysaccharide cores. Following
infection and immune clearance of the bacteria, the antiglycan antibodies
produced to fight the bacteria go on to attack the patient's own nerves,
causing paralysis. In some patients with multiple myeloma (a malignancy of
antibody-producing plasma cells), the tumor cells secrete monoclonal
antibodies against glycolipids, such as the rare sulfoglucuronyl epitope of
nervous system GSLs termed HNK-1 (IV3GlcA[3-sulfate]-nLc4Cer). These patients
suffer severe peripheral neuropathy.

Several bacterial toxins take advantage of GSLs to gain access to cells
([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Cholera toxin and the structurally
related _Escherichia coli_ heat-labile enterotoxins are produced in the
intestinal tract of infected individuals, bind to intestinal epithelial cell
surfaces, and insert their toxic polypeptide “payload” through the cell
membrane, where it disrupts ion fluxes, causing severe diarrhea. The toxins
behave as docking modules with gangliosides acting as the site of attachment.
Five identical polypeptide B subunits in a ring each bind to ganglioside GM1
(Galβ1-3GalNAcβ1-4[Neu5Acα2-3]Galβ1-4GlcβCer) on the cell surface, and a sixth
A subunit (the “payload”) is then inserted through the membrane. A similar
mechanism is used by _Shiga_ toxin (also called verotoxin), which binds to the
glycolipid Gb3Cer (globotriaosylceramide, Galα1-4Galβ1-4GlcβCer) via five
subunits in a ring, each with three GSL-binding sites. In contrast, tetanus
and related botulinum toxins are multidomain single polypeptides. One domain
binds b-series gangliosides on nerve cells, whereas the other domains
translocate the toxin into cells and disrupt proteins essential for synaptic
transmission. Custom-designed multivalent sugars are being evaluated as high-
affinity blockers of certain bacterial toxins. In addition to soluble toxins,
certain intact bacteria also bind to specific GSLs via bacterial surface
proteins called adhesins. This adherence is essential for successful
colonization and symbiosis. Microbial adhesins are addressed in more detail in
[Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/).

Malignant transformation in cancer progression is often associated with
changes in the glycan structures of glycoproteins and glycolipids. The changes
result mainly from altered levels of glycosyltransferase activities involved
in glycolipid biosynthesis. The increase of GD3 or GM2 in melanoma, and of
sialyl-Lewis a (Neu5Acα2-3Galβ1-3[Fucα1-4]GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcβCer) in
gastrointestinal cancers are typical examples ([Chapter
47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). Certain cancers also produce and shed
gangliosides that have an immunosuppressive effect.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Akemi Suzuki and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Keisuke
Kitakaze, Sumita Mishra, and Takashi Watanabe.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.012

Plasma membrane proteins are either peripheral proteins or integral membrane
proteins. The latter include proteins that span the lipid bilayer once or
several times, and another class that are covalently attached to lipids.
Proteins attached to glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) via their carboxyl
termini are generally found in the outer leaflet of the lipid bilayer and face
the extracellular environment. The GPI membrane anchor may be conveniently
thought of as an alternative to the single transmembrane domain of type-1
integral membrane proteins. This chapter reviews the discovery, distribution,
structure, biosynthesis, properties, and suggested functions of GPI membrane
anchors and related molecules.

The first data suggesting the existence of protein-phospholipid anchors
appeared in 1963 with the finding that crude bacterial phospholipase C (PLC)
selectively releases alkaline phosphatase from mammalian cells.
Phosphatidylinositol-protein anchors were first postulated in the mid-1970s
based on the ability of highly purified bacterial phosphatidylinositol-
specific PLC enzymes to release certain proteins, such as alkaline phosphatase
and 5′-nucleotidase, from mammalian plasma membranes. By 1985, these
predictions were confirmed by compositional and structural data from studies
on _Torpedo_ acetylcholinesterase, human and bovine erythrocyte
acetylcholinesterase, rat Thy-1, and the sleeping sickness parasite
_Trypanosoma brucei_ variant surface glycoprotein (VSG). The first complete
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) structures, which were those for _T.
brucei_ VSG and rat Thy-1, were solved in 1988 ([Chapter
1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/), [Figure
1.3](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/figure/ch1.f3/?report=objectonly)).

To date, hundreds of GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) have been identified in
many eukaryotes, ranging from protozoa and fungi to humans ([Online Appendix
12A](/books/n/glyco3/app_gpi_anchor/)). The range of described GPI-APs and the
distribution of putative GPI biosynthesis genes suggests that (1) GPI anchors
are almost ubiquitous among eukaryotes; (2) GPI-APs are functionally diverse
and include hydrolytic enzymes, adhesion molecules, complement regulatory
proteins, receptors, protozoan coat proteins, and prion proteins; and (3) in
mammals, alternative messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing may lead to the expression
of transmembrane and/or soluble and GPI-anchored forms of the same gene
product. These variants may be developmentally regulated. For example, neural
cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) exists in GPI-anchored and soluble forms when
expressed in muscle and in GPI-anchored and two transmembrane forms when
expressed in brain.

The substructure Manα1-4GlcNα1–6 _myo_ -inositol-1- _P_ -lipid is a universal
hallmark of GPI anchors and related structures. All but one (Online Appendix
12B) protein-linked GPI anchors share a larger common core structure ([Figure
12.1](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f1/?report=objectonly)). The structural
arrangements of GPI anchors are unique among protein–carbohydrate associations
in that the reducing terminus of the GPI oligosaccharide is not attached to
the protein. Rather, the reducing terminal glucosamine residue is α1-6 linked
to the D- _myo_ -inositol head group of a phosphatidylinositol (PI) moiety. A
distal, nonreducing mannose residue is attached to the protein via an
ethanolamine phosphate (EtNP) bridge between the C-6 hydroxyl group of mannose
and the α-carboxyl group of the carboxy-terminal amino acid. GPIs are one of
the rare instances in which glucosamine is found without either an N-acetyl or
N-sulfate moiety (as in proteoglycans) ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

Beyond the common core, the structures of mature GPI anchors are quite
diverse, depending on both the protein to which they are attached and the
organism in which they are synthesized ([Figure
12.1](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f1/?report=objectonly) and Online Appendix
12B). Modifications to the core include additional EtNP and a wide variety of
linear and branched glycosyl substituents of largely unknown function.

There is considerable variation in the PI moiety. Indeed, GPI is a rather
loose term because, strictly speaking, PI refers specifically to D- _myo_
-inositol-1- _P_ -3( _sn-_ 1,2-diacylglycerol) (i.e., diacyl-PI), whereas many
GPIs contain other types of inositolphospholipids, such as _lyso_ acyl-PI,
alkylacyl-PI, alkenylacyl-PI, and inositolphosphoceramide (Online Appendix
12B). Another variation, termed inositol acylation, is characterized by the
presence of an ester-linked fatty acid attached to the C-2 hydroxyl of the
inositol residue. The presence of this modification makes the anchor
inherently resistant to the action of bacterial PI-specific PLC. The available
lipid structural data suggest that (1) inositolphosphoceramide-based protein-
linked GPIs are only found in “lower” eukaryotes, such as _Saccharomyces
cerevisiae_ , _Aspergillus niger_ , _Dictyostelium discoideum_ , and
_Trypanosoma cruzi_ ; (2) the lipid structures of GPIs generally do not
reflect those of the general cellular PI or inositolphosphoceramide pool; and
(3) the lipid structures of some (e.g., trypanosome) GPI-APs are under
developmental control.

The factors that control the synthesis of a mature GPI anchor found on a given
protein appear to be similar to those for other posttranslational
modifications such as N- and O-glycosylation. Thus, primary control is at the
cellular level, whereby the levels of specific biosynthetic and processing
enzymes dictate the final repertoire of structures. Secondary control is at
the level of the tertiary/quaternary structure of the protein bearing the GPI
anchor, which affects accessibility to processing enzymes. Examples of primary
control include (1) differences in GPI glycan side chains in human versus
porcine membrane dipeptidase and brain versus thymocyte rat Thy-1 and (2)
differences in glycan side chains and lipid structure when _T. brucei_ VSG is
expressed in bloodstream and insect life-cycle stages of the parasite. An
example of secondary control is the difference in VSG glycan side chains when
VSGs with different carboxy-terminal sequences are expressed in the same
trypanosome clone.

In mammalian cells, some free GPIs (GPI-anchor biosynthetic intermediates) are
found at the cell surface, but their functional significance is unknown. On
the other hand, several protozoa (particularly trypanosomatids) express high
numbers (>107 copies per cell) of free GPIs on their cell surface as metabolic
end products. These include the so-called glycoinositol phospholipids (GIPLs)
and lipophosphoglycans (LPGs) of the _Leishmania_. Some protozoan (type-1)
GIPLs conform to the Manα1-6Manα1-4GlcNα1-6PI sequence common to protein-
linked GPIs, whereas others contain a (type-2) Manα1-3Manα1-4GlcNα1-6PI motif,
and still others are hybrid structures containing the branched motif
(Manα1-6)Manα1-3Manα1-4GlcNα1-6PI.

The presence of a GPI anchor may be inferred by the identification of an
amino-terminal signal peptide and a carboxy-terminal GPI signal peptide from
the predicted primary amino acid sequence of a given gene ([Figure
12.2](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f2/?report=objectonly)). Such predictions
can be verified by structural analysis, decribed below, or by indirect
methods: the shift of proteins from the pellet to the supernatant after
treatment of whole cells with PI-PLC is one such simple procedure. Variations
on this theme use Triton X-114 (a nonionic detergent) phase separation whereby
GPI-APs partition into the detergent-rich phase before, but not after, PI-PLC
treatment. An additional criterion is the appearance of an epitope known as
the “cross-reacting determinant” following PI-PLC cleavage. Some GPI anchors
are acylated at C-2 of inositol and therefore resistant to PI-PLC but all are
sensitive to serum GPI-phospholipase D (GPI-PLD). However, GPI-PLD cleavage
generally requires detergent solubilization of the substrate and does not
generate a “cross-reacting determinant.” The GPI-PLD reaction also leaves one
fatty acid attached to the protein (the inositol acyl group) and, depending on
the protein, this may prevent complete Triton X-114 phase separation after
GPI-PLD digestion. Finally, GPI anchors may be labeled biosynthetically with
[3H] _myo_ -inositol. Certain pore-forming bacterial toxins such as aerolysin
have been shown to bind to GPI anchors, and these may be used to probe one-
and two-dimensional gel western blots.

GPI anchors are complex molecules that include amide, glycosidic,
phosphodiester, and hydroxyester linkages between their various components and
the challenge of their organic synthesis has been met by several groups.
Analogs of GPI substructures have been instrumental in probing the comparative
enzymology of GPI biosynthesis in “lower” and “higher” eukaryotes and methods
to ligate synthetic GPIs to proteins, to make fluorescent GPI membrane probes
and GPI glycan microarrays are now well established.

The GPI-anchor structure lends itself to selective cleavage by several
chemical and enzyme reagents. These were originally used to help determine GPI
structures and are now applied to confirm the presence of a GPI anchor and/or
obtain partial structural information from native or [3H]mannose-,
[3H]glucosamine-, [3H]inositol-, or [3H]fatty-acid-radiolabeled GPI-APs or
GPI-biosynthetic intermediates. Some of these reactions and their applications
for GPI structure analysis are illustrated in [Figure
12.2](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f2/?report=objectonly). A key reaction is
nitrous acid deamination of the glucosamine residue. This gentle (room
temperature, pH 4.0) reaction is dependent on the free amino group of the
glucosamine residue and gives a highly selective cleavage of the glucosamine-
inositol glycosidic bond. The reaction liberates the PI moiety, which can be
isolated by solvent partition and analyzed by mass spectrometry, and generates
a free reducing terminus on the GPI glycan in the form of 2,5-anhydromannose.
This reducing sugar can be reduced to [1-3H]2,5-anhydromannitol (AHM) by
sodium borotritide reduction to introduce a radiolabel, or it may be attached
to a fluorophore such as 2-aminobenzamide (2-AB) by reductive amination. Once
the GPI glycan is radioactively or fluorescently labeled and dephosphorylated
with aqueous hydrogen fluoride, the glycan can often be conveniently sequenced
using exoglycosidases. Partial structural information may also be obtained by
tandem mass spectrometry of GPI-peptides generated by trypsin, proteinase K,
or Pronase digestion of GPI-APs, or by tandem mass spectrometry of GPI glycans
released by aqueous hydrogen fluoride dephosphorylation and permethylated
before analysis.

The biosynthesis of GPI anchors occurs in three stages: (1) preassembly of a
GPI precursor in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, (2) attachment of
the GPI to newly synthesized protein in the lumen of the ER with concomitant
cleavage of a carboxy-terminal GPI-addition signal peptide, and (3) lipid
remodeling and/or carbohydrate side-chain modifications in the ER and after
transport to the Golgi.

Analysis of GPI precursor biosynthesis was first made possible by the
development of a cell-free system in _T. brucei._ Each trypanosome has 1×107
molecules of GPI-linked VSG on its surface. Therefore, enzymes and
intermediates in the GPI-biosynthetic pathway are relatively abundant in
microsomal membrane preparations produced from this organism. The sequence of
events underlying GPI biosynthesis has been studied in _T. brucei_ , _T.
cruzi_ , _Toxoplasma gondii_ , _Plasmodium falciparum_ , _Leishmania major_ ,
_Paramecium, S. cerevisiae_ , _Cryptococcus neoformans_ , and mammalian cells.
The emphasis on eukaryotic microbes reflects the abundance of GPI-APs in these
organisms and the potential of GPI inhibition for chemotherapeutic
intervention. This notion has been genetically validated in the bloodstream
form of _T. brucei_ , in yeast, and in _Candida albicans_.

The essential events in GPI precursor biosynthesis are, like the core
structure, highly conserved. There are, however, variations on the theme, and
_T. brucei_ and mammalian cell GPI pathways are used here to represent these
differences ([Figure
12.3](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f3/?report=objectonly)). In all cases, GPI
biosynthesis involves the transfer of _N_ -acetylglucosamine from UDP-GlcNAc
to PI to give GlcNAc-PI via an ER-membrane-bound multiprotein complex ([Figure
12.4](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f4/?report=objectonly), [Table
12.1](/books/NBK453072/table/CH12TB1/?report=objectonly),). This step occurs
on the cytoplasmic face of the ER, as does the second step of the pathway, the
de-N-acetylation of GlcNAc-PI to GlcN-PI. Notable differences between the _T.
brucei_ and mammalian GPI-biosynthetic pathways occur from GlcN-PI onward.
Thus, inositol acylation (the transfer of fatty acid to the C-2 hydroxyl group
of the D- _myo_ -inositol residue) of GlcN-PI strictly follows the action of
the first mannosyltransferase in _T. brucei_ , whereas these steps are
temporally reversed in mammalian cells. In the mammalian pathway, inositol
acylation and inositol deacylation are discrete steps that occur only at the
beginning and end of the pathway, respectively, whereas in _T. brucei_ these
reactions occur on multiple GPI intermediates. Furthermore, in some mammalian
cells such as human erythroblasts, the inositol-linked fatty acid is never
removed and the mature GPI protein retains three fatty chains (Online Appendix
12B, panel C). Fatty-acid remodeling in _T. brucei_ occurs at the end of the
pathway, but before transfer to VSG protein, and involves exchanging the _sn_
-2 fatty acids (a mixture of C18–C22 species) and the _sn_ -1 fatty acid
(C18:0) exclusively for C14:0 myristate. In contrast, the lipid remodeling in
mammalian cells is more complex. Many protein-linked GPIs contain _sn_
-1-alkyl-2-acyl-PI with two saturated fatty chains, whereas major cellular PI
is predominantly _sn_ -1-stearoyl-2-arachidonoyl-PI (i.e., with C18:0 and
C20:4 fatty acids and few, if any, alkyl or alkenyl species). Two processes
are involved in these structural changes. First, remodeling from the diacyl-PI
to the 1-alkyl-2-acyl form having unsaturated fatty acid at the _sn_
-2-position occurs in the ER to GlcN-aPI. The reaction that mediates this
remodeling is yet to be determined. Second, fatty-acid remodeling occurs after
GPI is transferred to proteins, the inositol-linked acyl chain is removed, and
GPI-APs are transported to the Golgi. This is accomplished by exchanging the
unsaturated _sn_ -2 fatty acid with saturated fatty acid, mainly stearate
(C18:0). Lipid remodeling of GPIs in yeast also involves two processes but
they occur in the ER. The first is fatty-acid remodeling that exchanges the
unsaturated _sn_ -2 fatty acid with the C26:0 chain. The second process
involves the exchange of diacylglycerol for ceramide on many, but not all, GPI
proteins.

The identification of GPI pathway genes has been principally by expression
cloning using GPI-deficient mutants of mammalian cells and temperature-
sensitive yeast mutants. More recently, epitope tagging/pull-down/proteomic
approaches have been used to identify GPI pathway-associated components. The
known mammalian and yeast components and their respective topologies in the ER
membrane are shown in [Table
12.1](/books/NBK453072/table/CH12TB1/?report=objectonly) and [Figure
12.4](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f4/?report=objectonly).

The transfer of the preassembled GPI precursor to protein occurs via a
multisubunit transamidase complex with a cysteine-protease-like catalytic
subunit. The reaction involves two complex substrates: the GPI precursor and
the carboxyl terminus of a partially folded nascent protein ([Figure
12.5](/books/NBK453072/figure/ch12.f5/?report=objectonly)). The carboxy-
terminal GPI-addition signal peptide (GPIsp) has three domains: (1) three
relatively small amino acids (Ala, Asn, Asp, Cys, Gly, or Ser) located at ω,
ω+1, and ω+2, where ω is the amino acid attached to the GPI anchor and where
ω+1 and ω+2 are the first two residues of the cleaved peptide; (2) a
relatively polar domain of typically five to 10 residues; and (3) a
hydrophobic domain of typically 15–20 hydrophobic amino acids. These GPIsp
sequences do not have a strict consensus, but they are easily identified by
eye and by automated algorithms. The final hydrophobic stretch of amino acids
often resembles a transmembrane domain, but it is the absence of positively
charged and polar residues immediately after it that makes a GPIsp easy to
spot. Like N-glycosylation sequons, a GPIsp will only be functional if the
protein is translocated into the ER. Essentially all GPI-APs have an amino-
terminal signal peptide as well.

Apart from the final glycan structures (Online Appendix 12B), little is known
about the genes and enzymes involved in adding carbohydrate side chains to the
conserved GPI core. The only exceptions are the mannosyltransferase (encoded
by _SMP3_ / _PIGZ_ ) that adds the fourth αMan residue to yeast and mammalian
GPI anchors during GPI precursor assembly in the ER, and a Gal- and GlcNAc-
transferase involved in elaborating the _T. brucei_ procyclin GPI anchor in
the Golgi.

The transport of GPI-APs from the ER to the Golgi is mediated by coat protein
II (COPII)-coated transport vesicles. Packaging of GPI-APs into the vesicles
requires a transmembrane cargo receptor, a complex of four p24 family
proteins, that link luminally oriented GPI to COPII components on the
cytoplasmic side.

GPI-APs with two long hydrocarbon chains (i.e., those containing
diacylglycerol, alkylacylglycerol, alkenylacylglycerol, or ceramide) provide a
stable association with the lipid bilayer. It follows that inositol-acylated
GPI proteins with three fatty-acid chains should be more stably associated. On
the other hand, a GPI-related structure with only a single C24:0 alkyl chain
(e.g., the lipophosphoglycan of _Leishmania_ ) has a half-life of only minutes
at the cell surface and is secreted intact into the medium. The thermodynamics
of bilayer interactions also depend on the nature of the fatty-acid chains
(length and degree of saturation). In this regard, the saturated nature of
most (but not all) mammalian GPI anchors (Online Appendix 12B, panels C and D)
is thought to explain why GPI-APs associate with “lipid rafts.” The current
model for mammalian lipid rafts is that of transient liquid-ordered
nanoclusters of membrane components. These are dependent on dynamic cortical
actin asters that, through adaptor proteins, cluster phosphatidylserine (PS)
phospholipids on the inner face of the plasma membrane bilayer. Compared with
most other phospholipid classes, PS has long saturated fatty acids and
bringing these together in a cluster provides a nucleating center to cocluster
other long-chain membrane components in the outer leaflet of the membrane,
including GPI-APs and glycosphingolipids. This coupling effect occurs because
the long saturated lipid chains from inner leaflet PS overlap and interact
with those of GPI-APs and glycosphingolipids in the middle of the bilayer. A
compelling aspect of this model is that, although actin can organize molecules
in the outer leaflet into nanoclusters, the clustering of GPI-APs in the outer
leaftlet (with antibodies or multivalent ligands) can also, conversely,
organize the cortical actin and its associated machinery. This provides a
possible explanation for the perplexing, but well-characterized, ability of
GPI-APs to transduce signals across the plasma membrane.

There are many examples of transmembrane signaling via the cross-linking of
GPI-APs with antibody and clustering with a second antibody on various cells,
particularly leukocytes. Cellular responses include an increase in
intracellular Ca++, tyrosine phosphorylation, proliferation, cytokine
induction, and oxidative burst. These antibody-induced signaling events are
clearly dependent on the presence of a GPI anchor and might be due to the
induction and coalescence of lipid raft nanoclusters. Despite the plethora of
GPI-protein cross-linking/signal-transduction examples, it should be noted
that there are no receptor/ligand pairs of established physiological relevance
that signal in a GPI-dependent way. Thus, GPI-APs known to be involved in
transmembrane signaling, such as the glial-cell-(line-)derived neurotrophic
factor receptor-α (GDNFR-α), need to be associated with transmembrane β
coreceptors to transmit their signals. Similarly, GPI-anchored CD14 (the
LPS/LPS-binding protein receptor) functions equally well with a GPI anchor or
with a spliced transmembrane domain, and the signal-transducing partner for
CD14 is the transmembrane Toll-like receptor-4.

The replacement of carboxy-terminal transmembrane domains of type-1 integral
membrane proteins by GPI-addition signal peptides allows their expression on
the plasma membrane of transfected mammalian cells in GPI-anchored form. This
can be a useful way to produce soluble forms of membrane proteins. For
example, the T-cell receptor could not be expressed in a soluble form by
simply deleting the transmembrane domain, but it could be expressed in GPI-
anchored form and then rendered soluble by the action of bacterial PI-PLC. In
addition, purified GPI-APs can be used to coat hydrophobic surface plasmon
resonance chips, thus providing a convenient way of orienting and presenting
proteins for binding studies. It is clear that purified GPI-APs will
spontaneously insert into lipid bilayers. The physiological significance of
direct GPI-protein exchange between membranes is still uncertain, particularly
because all mammals express potent GPI-PLD activity in serum that can remove
the lipid (phosphatidic acid) component of the anchor and, therefore, prevent
GPI-protein reinsertion. The reinsertion property of GPI-APs has been
exploited experimentally to “paint” exogenous proteins onto cell surfaces.

GPI anchors are essential for life in some, but not all, eukaryotic microbes.
In the yeast _S. cerevisiae_ , and probably most fungi, the presence of a GPI
anchor is used to target certain mannoproteins for covalent incorporation into
the β-glucan cell wall. Cross-linking occurs via a transglycosylation
reaction, whereby a mannose residue within the GPI-anchor core is transferred
to the β-glucan polymer. Defects in cell wall biosynthesis are known to be
detrimental to yeast and this may be why GPI biosynthesis is essential to this
organism. Gene knockout studies have shown that GPI biosynthesis is also
essential for the bloodstream form of _T. brucei_ , even in tissue culture.
This may be due to nutritional stress because this parasite uses an essential
GPI-anchored transferrin receptor. On the other hand, surprisingly, GPI
biosynthesis and/or transfer to protein are not essential for the insect-
dwelling forms of _T. brucei_ or _Leishmania_. The availability of GPI-
deficient mammalian cell lines shows that GPI-APs are not essential at a
cellular level. However, mouse knockouts and tissue-specific conditional
knockouts of the _PIGA_ gene (the catalytic subunit of the UDP-GlcNAc:PI α1-6
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase) clearly show that GPI-APs are essential for
early embryo and tissue development, respectively. In the plant _Arabidopsis_
, GPI biosynthesis is required for cell wall synthesis, morphogenesis, and
pollen tube development. GPI anchors impart to their attached proteins the
ability to be shed in soluble form from the cell surface through the action of
cellular or serum GPI-cleaving enzymes. Mammalian sperm acquire an ability to
fuse with oocytes after GPI-anchored TEX101 is released by a sperm-associated
GPI-cleaving enzyme tACE (testis form angiotensin converting enzyme). Certain
proliferating motor neurons initiate differentiation after a GPI-anchored
proteinase inhibitor RECK is released by a GPI-cleaving enzyme GDE2. When the
activity of ADAM10 metalloproteinase suppressed by RECK is expressed,
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/)-ligand is degraded by ADAM10,
resulting in Notch signaling termination and a switch from proliferation to
differentiation. In “lower” eukaryotes, GPI anchors may be useful for
assembling particularly dense cell-surface protein coats, such as the VSG coat
of _T. brucei_. In this case, each parasite expresses five million VSG dimers
on the cell surface to protect it against complement-mediated lysis. If each
VSG monomer had, instead of a GPI anchor, a single transmembrane domain, there
would be little room for other integral membrane proteins such as hexose and
nucleoside transporters. Generally, GPI-APs do recycle through intracellular
compartments but, compared with typical transmembrane proteins, they reside in
higher proportion on the cell surface and have longer half-lives. There are
several examples of the exchange of GPI-APs from one cell surface to another.
Some GPI-APs are incorporated into exosomes, suggesting a possibility of
exosome-mediated cell-to-cell transfer. Sperm acquire some GPI-APs such as
CD52 from epididymis most likely mediated by exosomes.

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a human disease in which patients
suffer from hemolytic anemia. The condition arises from loss of expression of
several GPI-APs that protect their blood cells from lysis by the complement
system (e.g., decay accelerating factor and CD59). The defect in PNH cells is
a somatic mutation in the X-linked _PIGA_ gene and appears to occur in a bone
marrow stem cell. Unlike other enzymes in the pathway, which are encoded by
autosomal genes, PNH caused by _PIGA_ mutations is thought to arise at a
higher frequency because of X inactivation. Both in male and female stem
cells, somatic mutation in the one active allele of _PIGA_ results in the
complete loss of a functional UDP-GlcNAc:PI α1–6
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase ([Chapter 46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/)).

Inherited GPI deficiencies (IGDs) are caused by germline mutations in genes
involved in GPI biosynthesis, protein transfer, and remodeling. Because
complete GPI deficiency causes embryonic lethality, mutations in IGDs are
hypomorhic, causing partial deficiency. Mutations in genes involved in GPI
remodeling such as PGAP1 can be null and cause GPI-APs with abnormal
structure. Patients with IGDs caused by mutations in 14 genes in the GPI-
biosynthetic pathway have been reported. Most of these mutations were
identified by whole exome sequencing of patients’ cells. Major symptoms of
IGDs are neurological problems such as developmental delay/intellectual
disability, seizures, cerebral and/or cerebellar progressive atrophy, hearing
loss, and visual impairment. Other symptoms include hyperphosphatasia;
brachytelepharangy; typical facial features such as hypertelolism and tented
mouth; cleft palate; anorectal, renal, and heart anomalies; and Hirschsprung
disease ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

GPI biosynthesis and transfer to protein are essential for yeast, for
pathogenic fungi, and for the African sleeping sickness parasite _T. brucei_
as mentioned above. Several key surface molecules of the apicomplexan
parasites _Plasmodium_ (malaria), _Toxoplasma,_ and _Cryptosporidium_ are GPI-
anchored, and it is thought that the GPI pathway is likely to be essential to
these pathogens. Thus, pathogen-specific GPI pathway inhibitors are being
actively sought as potential drugs. In addition, there is evidence that some
parasite GPI anchors have a direct role in modulating the host immune response
to infection.

Like other glycoconjugates, GPI-APs can be exploited by pathogens. For
example, the GPI anchors themselves are receptors for hemolytic pore-forming
toxins such as aerolysin from _Aeromonas hydrophilia_ , which causes
gastroenteritis, deep wound infections, and septicemia in humans. In addition,
the GPI-AP CD55/DAF is the principal cell-surface ligand for enterovirus and
several echoviruses. Finally, the endogenous prion protein is GPI-anchored and
it is thought that the conformational changes that it undergoes to become the
aberrant spongiform-encephalopathy (“mad cow disease” or scrapie in
sheep)-causing form may be associated with a clathrin-independent endocytic
pathway followed by GPI-anchored prion protein in neurons.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Vered Padler-
Karavani, Kristian Saied-Santiago, and Daniel Varon Silva.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.013

This chapter focuses on several less easily categorized types of glycoprotein
linkages that occur on specific proteins or domains, most of which have
specific biological functions. O-linked modifications of epidermal growth
factor (EGF)-like repeats (O-fucose, O-glucose, and O-GlcNAc) regulate the
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) signaling pathway. O-Fucosylation
of thrombospondin type 1 repeats (TSRs) is required for folding of these
domains in a number of secreted matricellular proteins. O-Mannosylation of
α-dystroglycan is essential for interactions with several extracellular matrix
proteins. Defects in the glycosyltransferases that add these glycans
(O-fucose, O-glucose, O-GlcNAc, and O-mannose) result in human diseases.
C-Mannosylation is a unique form of glycosylation in which mannose is linked
through a carbon–carbon bond to tryptophan. O-Linked galactose disaccharides
are added to hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine residues and play an important
role in collagen fibril formation. Although the glycans described here are
found on relatively few glycoproteins, they play specific and important roles
in biology.

In glycoproteins, the linkage between the first sugar of a glycan and the
protein, defines its glycosylation class. In [Chapter
1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/), [Figure
1.7](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/figure/ch1.f7/?report=objectonly) shows 32 known
types of glycan–protein linkages, including the common GlcNAc-N-Asn, GalNAc-O-
Ser/Thr, and Xyl-O-Ser present in glycoproteins and proteoglycans. The first
indication of the existence of novel, nonclassical types of glycosylation came
from the analysis of human urine, which revealed unusual amino acid glycosides
such as Glcβ1–3Fucα-Thr. This discovery garnered little interest at the time.
However, finding O-fucose directly linked to various clotting proteins and
signaling receptors, such as [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/),
broadened this perspective. Monoclonal antibodies that detected glycans on
specific proteins such as α-dystroglycan provided tools to identify other
novel glycans. In addition, mass spectrometry of proteins revealed unusual
modifications, such as mannose linked to protein as a C-glycoside. [Table
13.1](/books/NBK453017/table/CH13TB1/?report=objectonly) describes many of the
less common linkages synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–Golgi
pathway. [Chapters 18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/) and [19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)
describe the very few known glycosylation linkages synthesized in the nucleus
and cytoplasm.

[Epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like repeats](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/epidermalgrowthfactoregflikerepeats/) are small protein domains (∼40
amino acids) that are defined by six conserved cysteine residues, which form
three disulfide bonds ([Figure
13.1A](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)). They are found in
a few hundred cell-surface and secreted proteins in metazoans and, depending
on their sequence, may be modified with the less common O-glycans described
above. Proteins with these O-glycans attached to EGF-like repeats include
several involved in blood clot formation and dissolution, and the
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) family of receptors and canonical
Notch ligands (Delta and Serrate/Jagged) involved in embryogenesis and cell
fate decisions. The glycan modifications are important because they regulate
signal transduction during early development, cell differentiation, and the
growth of several cancers.

The α-linked O-fucose modification immediately precedes the third conserved
cysteine of certain EGF-like repeats ([Figure
13.1A](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)). The consensus
motif for O-fucosylation is C2X4(S/T)C3, in which C2 and C3 are the second and
third conserved cysteines of the EGF-like repeat. Nearly 100 proteins in mouse
or human databases contain this sequence. O-Fucose can be elongated to a
tetrasaccharide (Siaα2–3/6Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Fuc-O-Ser/Thr) in certain contexts
(e.g., EGF1 from human clotting factor IX and EGF12 from mouse NOTCH1) ([Table
13.1](/books/NBK453017/table/CH13TB1/?report=objectonly)), but not in others
(e.g., EGF1 from human clotting factor VII and EGF5 from mouse NOTCH1).

Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1) transfers fucose from GDP-Fuc to a
properly folded EGF-like repeat containing the appropriate consensus sequence
([Figure 13.1B](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)). O-Fucose
can be elongated by a β1-3 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (β3GnT) that is
specific for O-fucose residues in properly folded EGF-like repeats. The gene
for the O-fucose-specific β3GnT was originally identified in Drosophila as a
modifier of [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) signaling called
_fringe_ (see below). There are three mammalian homologs: Manic fringe (MFNG),
Lunatic fringe (LFNG), and Radical fringe (RFNG). Each of the
[Fringe](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/fringe/) proteins catalyzes the transfer
of GlcNAc from UDP-GlcNAc to O-fucose on an EGF-like repeat. The GlcNAc can be
further elongated by a β4GalT (e.g., B4GALT1) and capped with a sialic acid,
probably using the same sialyltransferases as those that act on N- or
O-glycans (Siaα2-3/6SiaTs). Elongation past the disaccharide has not been
observed to date on Drosophila Notch, although a branched O-fucose
trisaccharide (GlcUAβ1-4[GlcNAcβ1-3]Fucitol) has been detected in a glycomics
analysis of O-glycans released from proteins extracted from Drosophila
embryos.

The O-fucose glycans play important roles in the
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) signal transduction pathway.
Notch was originally identified in Drosophila, and homologs have been found in
all metazoans, with four Notch receptors in mammals. Activation of Notch
signal transduction is controlled at numerous levels, and dysregulation of
Notch signaling results in a number of human diseases, including several types
of cancer and a variety of developmental disorders. Two classes of canonical
ligands bind to and activate Notch in Drosophila: Delta and Serrate. Mammals
have three Delta-like homologs (DLL1, DLL3, and DLL4), and two Serrate
homologs called Jagged 1 and 2 (JAG1 and JAG2). These ligands are single-pass
transmembrane glycoproteins that bind to and activate Notch receptors on an
adjacent cell. The extracellular domain of Notch contains up to 36 tandem EGF-
like repeats ([Figure
13.2](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f2/?report=objectonly)), many of which
contain consensus sites for O-fucosylation ([Figure
13.1A](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)).

Elimination of POFUT1 in Drosophila or mice results in embryonic lethality
with strong [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) developmental
defects, indicating that O-fucose modification of Notch is essential for Notch
function. Heterozygous mutations in the human _POFUT1_ gene cause a rare
autosomal-dominant skin discoloration and symptoms of Dowling–Degos disease
type 2 (DDD2; MIM 615327). POFUT1 is localized to the ER, where it only
modifies properly folded EGF-like repeats, suggesting that O-fucosylation may
have some role in quality control. The Drosophila homolog of POFUT1 has
chaperone activity and is proposed to play a role in the proper folding of
Notch. However, loss of POFUT1 has only minor effects, if any, on the
trafficking of Notch receptors to the surface of mammalian cells. Structural
studies reveal that the O-fucose on EGF12 directly participates in ligand
binding, and elimination of this O-fucose glycosylation site by mutation in
mouse NOTCH1 reduces Notch activity.

O-Fucose glycans also modulate [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/)
activity during development. The expression of O-fucose-specific
[Fringe](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/fringe/) enzymes is dynamic, increasing
or decreasing depending on developmental stage or tissue. Mutations in Fringe
show phenotypes in several, but not all, contexts in which Notch functions.
Elimination of Fringe in Drosophila causes defects in wing, eye, and leg
development, whereas ablation of _Lfng_ in mice causes a severe defect in
somite formation. Mutations in human _LFNG_ result in malformed vertebrae and
ribs (spondylocostal dysostosis type 3; MIM 609813). Fringe enzymes mediate
their effects on Notch activity by transferring GlcNAc to O-fucose on Notch
receptors ([Figure
13.1B](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)). Surprisingly,
Fringe reduces Notch activation by Serrate/Jagged ligands, but it potentiates
Notch activation by Delta ligands ([Figure
13.3](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f3/?report=objectonly)). A major question
is how. Presumably the multiple Notch EGF-like repeats bearing O-fucose play a
role ([Figure 13.2](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f2/?report=objectonly)).
Fringe modification of some of these may activate signaling from Delta
ligands, whereas modification of others may inhibit signaling from
Serrate/Jagged. For instance, Fringe-mediated elongation of O-fucose in EGF12
of the ligand-binding domain clearly enhances the affinity between Notch and
Delta ligands, but how Fringe inhibits activation from Serrate/Jagged ligands
is less clear. One possibility is that the addition of GlcNAc by Fringe causes
a conformational change in the extracellular domain of Notch that reduces
activation by Serrate/Jagged. The fact that Fringe is a glycosyltransferase
that modifies O-fucose residues on Notch provides one of the clearest examples
to date of how a signal transduction pathway may be regulated by altering the
glycosylation of a receptor.

The β-linked O-glucose modification occurs between the first and second
conserved cysteines of EGF-like repeats at the consensus sequence C1XSX(P/A)C2
([Figure 13.1A](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)), which is
found in approximately 50 proteins in mouse or human databases. The O-glucose
glycan typically exists as the trisaccharide Xylα1–3Xylα1–3Glcβ-O-Ser,
although mono- and disaccharide forms are also seen. The human gene encoding
the protein O-glucosyltransferase is _POGLUT1, rumi_ in flies. Mutations in
_POGLUT1/rumi_ cause [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/)-deficient
developmental defects in flies and mice, although in mice, O-glucosylation
appears to be important for targets in addition to Notch. Similar to POFUT1,
heterozygous mutations in human _POGLUT1_ cause an autosomal-dominant disease
termed Dowling–Degos disease type 4 (DDD4; MIM 615696). O-Glucosylation does
not appear to affect Notch binding to canonical ligands but is required for
optimal Notch activation. Like POFUT1, POGLUT1 is localized to the ER and
requires a properly folded EGF-like repeat as substrate. The genes encoding
the xylosyltransferases are glucoside α1-3 xylososyltransferase ( _GXYLT1_ and
_GXYLT2_ ) and xyloside α1-3 xylosyltransferase ( _XXYLT1_ ) ([Figure
13.1B](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)). Elongation of
O-glucose with xylose has an inhibitory effect on Notch activity in flies.

Although β-linked O-GlcNAc is very common in the nuclear and cytosolic
compartments ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)), the same modification can
be found in membrane and secreted proteins occurring between the fifth and
sixth conserved cysteines of an EGF-like repeat at the putative consensus
C5XXGX(S/T)GXXC6 ([Figure
13.1A](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f1/?report=objectonly)) in mouse and
Drosophila [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/). However, sites have
been mapped on only a few proteins. The O-GlcNAc can be elongated by Gal and
Sia in mammals, putatively to form Siaα2/3-6Galβ1-4GlcNAc, a structure not yet
confirmed. The gene encoding the EGF-specific O-GlcNAc transferase, _EOGT_ ,
is distinct from _OGT_ , the GlcNAc-transferase that modifies nuclear and
cytoplasmic proteins ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Inactivation of
Drosophila _Eogt_ is pupal lethal and causes a wing-blistering defect if
deleted in the wing. Although genetic interactions between Eogt and Notch
pathway genes occur in Drosophila, no obvious Notch-deficient phenotypes are
observed. However, mutations in human _EOGT_ result in skin and skeletal
problems in AOS (Adams–Oliver syndrome type 4; MIM 615297), a disorder with
links to the Notch pathway.

O-Fucose is also found in thrombospondin type 1 repeats (TSRs). Similar to
EGF-like repeats, TSRs are small protein domains (50–60 amino acids) with six
conserved cysteines that form three disulfide bonds ([Figure
13.4](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f4/?report=objectonly)). Like EGF repeats,
TSRs are found in a subset of cell-surface and secreted proteins in metazoans,
and they appear to function in protein–protein interactions. The O-fucose site
occurs between the first and second conserved cysteine residues at the
putative consensus sequence C1X2(S/T)C2X2G in TSRs in approximately 50
proteins ([Table 13.1](/books/NBK453017/table/CH13TB1/?report=objectonly)).
The O-fucose on TSRs can be elongated to form the disaccharide Glcβ1-3Fucα-O-
Ser/Thr first observed nearly 30 years ago in glycosides from human urine. The
gene encoding the enzyme that fucosylates TSRs is _POFUT2_. It is expressed in
many cells and tissues and is distinct from POFUT1. Elimination of _Pofut2_ in
mice results in early embryonic lethality with defects in gastrulation. The
gene encoding the β3-glucosyltransferase that elongates O-fucose on TSRs is
_B3GLCT_. Mutations in _B3GLCT_ in humans results in a multifaceted severe
developmental disorder known as Peters-plus syndrome (MIM 261540). TSRs are
also often modified with C-mannose ([Figure
13.4](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f4/?report=objectonly); see below),
although the relationship between the two modifications is not yet clear. A
number of biologically interesting proteins are known or predicted to contain
this modification, including thrombospondin-1 and -2, all ADAMTS (a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs; ADAMTS 1–20) and
ADAMTS-like proteins, properdin, and F-spondin ([Table
13.1](/books/NBK453017/table/CH13TB1/?report=objectonly)). O-Fucosylation of
TSRs in several proteins including ADAMTS 13 and ADAMTS-like 1 is needed for
their secretion, suggesting that O-fucosylation of TSRs may be involved in
quality control or folding, similar to the predicted role of O-fucose on EGF-
like repeats in Drosophila. Like POFUT1, POFUT2 is also an ER-localized enzyme
that only fucosylates properly folded TSRs. Recent studies propose that both
POFUT2 and B3GLCT function in a novel ER quality control pathway required for
proper folding of TSRs. In thrombospondin-1, the region of the
[TSR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/thrombospondinrepeatstsr/) modified with
O-fucose mediates interactions between TSRs and several cell-surface
receptors. Thus, the presence of O-fucose in this region could influence
interactions between TSRs and adjacent cells, much as O-fucose on EGF-like
repeats regulates [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) ligand binding.
TSRs allow proteins like the thrombospondins to bind to cells and/or to other
components in the extracellular matrix. Cell binding is an essential step in
the biological roles of thrombospondins, including the antiangiogenic
functions of these proteins.

O-Mannose α-linked to protein was first identified in yeast in the 1950s
([Chapter 23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)). Fungi elongate this mannose with a
battery of mannosyltransferases to form extensions similar to those on their
N-glycans. O-Mannose was first identified in mammals in 1979, linked to a rat
brain proteoglycan. O-Mannose glycans account for up to one-third of all
O-glycans in some mammalian tissues, including brain. O-Mannose glycans in
mammals are quite varied and belong to three core classes ([Figure
13.5](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f5/?report=objectonly)). Defects in
O-mannosylation of the protein α-dystroglycan, the major extracellular
glycoprotein component of the dystrophin–glycoprotein complex, result in
multiple forms of congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD), known as the secondary
dystroglycanopathies that include Walker–Warburg syndrome, muscle–eye–brain
disease, Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy, and limb-girdle muscular
dystrophy ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). Some of the O-mannose glycans
on α-dystroglycan serve as binding sites for extracellular matrix proteins
that contain laminin globular domains. These same O-mannose glycans function
as a receptor for certain arenaviruses, and the loss of these glycans is also
associated with metastasis in multiple cancers.

The initiating O-mannosyltransferase unique to this pathway is common to all
three core classes ([Figure
13.5](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f5/?report=objectonly)). A heterodimer
composed of protein O-mannosyltransferase 1 and 2 (POMT1 and POMT2) catalyzes
the addition of O-Man to Ser/Thr residues of proteins in the ER using
dolichol-P-mannose as the donor. Core M1 O-mannose glycans ([Figure
13.5](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f5/?report=objectonly)) are then generated
by the action of a Golgi-localized N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (POMGNT1)
that adds β1-2GlcNAc to O-mannose on glycoproteins. Core M1 glycans can be
further elaborated by enzymes that also act in other pathways, including
galactosyltransferases, fucosyltransferases, glucuronyltransferases, and
sialyltransferases. Core M1 glycans can also be converted to Core M2 O-mannose
glycans by the addition of a β1-6GlcNAc to the O-Man, catalzyed by the _N_
-acetylglucosaminyltansferase MGAT5B. This new branch on core M2 glycans can
also be extended by the glycosyltransferases that act on core M1 ([Figure
13.5](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f5/?report=objectonly) core extensions).
Core M1 and M2 O-Man glycans have been identified on mammalian proteins
besides α-dystroglycan, including cadherins.

The core M3 glycans ([Figure
13.5](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f5/?report=objectonly)) possess key
functional properties and have to date been identified only on the mammalian
protein α-dystroglycan. Core 3 O-mannose is extended in the ER by an
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (POMGNT2) that adds a β1-4GlcNAc. This
disaccharide is a substrate for an N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
(B3GALNT2) that adds β1-3GalNAc to the GlcNAc. This trisaccharide is a
substrate for a secretory pathway kinase (POMK) that adds a 6-linked phosphate
to the core Man. The immediate next steps are the addition of a ribitol-5-P in
a phosphodiester linkage to the GalNAc catalyzed by fukutin (FKTN) followed by
the addition of another ribitol-5-P in a phosphodiester linkage to the first
ribitol by fukutin-related protein (FKRP). Isoprenic synthase domain protein
(ISPD) generates the sugar nucleotide CDP-ribitol that FKTN and FKRP use.
TMEM5 and B4GAT1 glycosyltransferases add a xylose and glucuronic acid,
respectively, to the outermost ribitol. This action serves to prime the core
M3 glycan for the addition of a repeating disaccharide (Xyl-α3-GlcA-β3-)n that
is catalyzed by the dual activity LARGE glycosyltransferase. This repeating
disaccharide, termed matriglycan, appears to be the binding site for
extracellular matrix proteins containing laminin globular domains, as well as
the receptor for certain arenaviruses.

Proteins with collagen domains are modified by a disaccharide, Glcα1-2Galβ-,
which is assembled on hydroxylysine or hydroxyproline residues. First
recognized on collagen in the 1960s, this O-glycan has been observed in other
proteins that have collagen-like modules, including adiponectin and pulmonary
surfactants proteins. Primitive forms of collagen in sponges and sea anemones
also have disaccharide-modified hydroxylysine. The first step in the pathway
is the hydroxylation of either lysine or proline to hydroxylysine or
hydroxyproline via the appropriate hydroxylases. The two-step glycosylation
rapidly follows on most of the available acceptor sites. Interestingly,
although the hydroxylation and addition of Gal are conserved in all animals
species examined, and occur by the action of two separate enzymes, giant
viruses have one bifunctional enzyme capable of hydroxylating lysine and
adding Glc instead of Gal to collagen.
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) is thought to
proceed until the protein folds and assembles into the well-known collagen
triple helix. Some studies suggest that the extent of glycosylation controls
or influences the rate of triple-helix formation and, in turn, the size of
collagen fibrils. Other studies suggest that excessive glycosylation of
hydroxylysines makes them poor substrates for extracellular enzymatic
deamination, the first step in cross-linking collagen. Mice lacking one of the
lysyl hydroxylases (LH3) fail to glycosylate collagen IV properly, which
causes embryonic lethality, and deposition of misfolded collagen in the ER.

Another novel type of glycosylation, first detected in human urine, is called
C-mannosylation. The C-1 atom of a single Man residue is added in α-linkage to
the C-2 atom of the indole moiety of tryptophan 7 (Trp7) in RNase 2 ([Figure
13.6](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f6/?report=objectonly)). Note that this is
a rare glycosidic linkage; it is a C–C bond rather than a C–O or C–N bond.
Structural analysis, biosynthetic studies in mammalian cell lines, and a
specific antibody against the modification, show that C-mannosylation is
widespread, but it appears to be absent in bacteria and yeast. Site-directed
mutagenesis shows that the critical glycosylation sequence in RNase 2 is W-X-
X-W-, with the first Trp being modified. Synthetic peptides with this motif
can be C-mannosylated in vitro, and more than 300 mammalian cell proteins have
this sequence. Several complement proteins contain TSRs with C-mannose
([Figure 13.4](/books/NBK453017/figure/ch13.f4/?report=objectonly)). For
instance, in properdin (which is a positive regulator of complement), 14 of 17
consensus sites are fully modified. [Dolichol](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/dolichol/)-P-mannose produced from GDP-Man ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)) is the biosynthetic donor for C-mannosylation in the
ER, and a gene encoding a C-mannosyltransferase has been identified in
_Caenorhabditis elegans_ ( _C. elegans_ ) (DPY-19). Mutants in DPY-19 cause a
neuroblast migration defect. The modification appears to either compete with,
or aid in, protein folding because already folded proteins are poor acceptor
substrates in vitro, and expression of some proteins in C-mannosylation-
disabled cells leads to their accumulation in the ER.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Dustin Middleton,
Ryan Porell, and Corinna Landig.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.014

This chapter describes the variable components of N-glycans, O-glycans, and
glycolipids attached to the core of each glycan class and presented in
[Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/), [10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/), and
[11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/). The glycan extensions of these cores form the
mature glycan and may include human blood group determinants. The terminal
sugars of the mature glycan often regulate the function(s) or recognition
properties of a glycoconjugate. Also discussed are milk oligosaccharides, that
carry many of the same extensions on a lactose core.

Many glycan extensions are regulated during embryogenesis and in the postnatal
period as part of the normal developmental program ([Chapter
41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)). Changes in terminal glycan structure are also
often associated with malignant transformation in cancer ([Chapter
47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). Tissue- and/or lineage-specific regulation of
glycan extension biosynthesis is largely due to the regulated expression of
the relevant glycosyltransferases. Biological consequences of such changes in
glycan extensions are discussed throughout this volume. However, the majority
of regulated terminal glycosylations observed likely have many different
functions, but they are not well understood.

The core structures in [Figure
14.1](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f1/?report=objectonly) have a terminal
GlcNAc and may receive β1-4Gal to generate a Type-2 unit composed of
Galβ1-4GlcNAc, also called _N-_ acetyllactosamine (LacNAc) ([Figure
14.2](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f2/?report=objectonly)). The terminal Gal
so generated can receive a β1-3GlcNAc, which in turn can receive a β1-4Gal,
thus forming two LacNAc units. These reactions may recur to form poly-[ _N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/)
[-3Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-] _n_ (poly-LacNAc). Poly-LacNAc chains occur in glycans
from most cell types. An alternative is a chain composed of LacdiNAc glycan
units [GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc] _n_ generated by the action of a β1-4GalNAc-
transferase. LacdiNAc (GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc) termini occur on N-glycans in bovine
milk, rat prolactin, and kidney epithelial cells, as well as in invertebrates
such as snails and worms ([Chapter 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)). These residues
are frequently α2-6-sialylated in vertebrates.

Terminal GlcNAc residues in N-glycans, O-glycans, and glycolipids may
alternatively be modified by β1-3Gal ([Figure
14.2](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f2/?report=objectonly)) to generate a
Type-1 unit composed of Galβ1-3GlcNAc. In humans, expression of Type-1 units
is relatively high in O-glycans of glycoproteins and glycolipids in the
epithelia of the gastrointestinal or reproductive tracts.

Type-1 and Type-2 units may be further modified by glycosyltransferases that
transfer sugars to terminal Gal or subterminal GlcNAc, generating sialylated,
fucosylated, or sulfated structures or blood group determinants.

Some glycoproteins and glycolipids preferentially carry poly-LacNAc. This
implies that the glycosyltransferases responsible can discriminate between
glycan acceptors with terminal GlcNAc or Gal. For example, poly-LacNAc
extensions preferentially occur on multiantennary N-glycans, particularly on
the β1-6GlcNAc branch synthesized by N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V
(GlcNAc-TV, MGAT5) ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Similarly, poly-LacNAc
extensions on O-GalNAc glycans associated with mucin glycoproteins often
preferentially occur on the β1-6GlcNAc transferred by a core 2 β1-6GlcNAcT
(CGNT1 to CGNT4; [Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). N-Glycans generally
have longer poly-LacNAc extensions than O-glycans, and both may receive sialic
acid or Fuc residues or sulfate. Thus, poly-LacNAc chains may serve as linear,
extended scaffolds for the presentation of specific terminal glycans, whose
functions require them to be presented at a certain distance from the plasma
membrane. Poly-LacNAc chains are also recognized with high affinity by
galectins that recognize internal as well as terminal Gal residues ([Chapter
36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). Interestingly, poly-LacNAc is also the backbone
of keratan sulfate (KS, see below), in which the Gal and GlcNAc residues are
6-O-sulfated, and such sulfated poly-LacNAc is known not to be recognized by
galectins.

Poly-LacNAc chains may also become branched by the addition of β1-6GlcNAc to
internal Gal residues. Branched and nonbranched poly-LacNAc chains correspond
to the “I” and “i” blood group antigens, respectively ([Figure
14.3](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f3/?report=objectonly)). These antigens
were originally discovered during the analysis of a cold-dependent
agglutinating antibody (cold agglutinin) in a patient with acquired hemolytic
anemia ([Chapter 46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/)). Cold agglutinin antibodies
interact with red blood cells (erythrocytes) that express the I blood group
(the “I” antigen). Nonreactive donors are classified as having the i blood
group. Distinct β1-6GlcNAcTs yield different types of β1-6-branched glycans
([Figure 14.3](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f3/?report=objectonly)). The i
antigen is abundantly expressed on the surface of embryonic erythrocytes and
on erythrocytes during times of altered erythropoiesis. Such cells are
relatively deficient in the expression of the I antigen. However, during the
first 18 months of life, I antigen reactivity on erythrocytes reaches adult
levels, and i antigen reactivity declines to very low levels. This
developmental regulation is presumed to be due to regulated expression of
CGNT1 to CGNT4 genes that encode β1-6GlcNAcTs. Rare individuals never express
the I antigen on erythrocytes and maintain embryonic levels of erythrocyte i
antigen expression as adults. Individuals with this i phenotype are
potentially homozygous for inactive alleles at CGNT loci. There is no obvious
pathophysiology associated as yet with the absence of the I blood group in
humans.

The [ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) blood group antigens were
discovered early in the 20th century by Karl Landsteiner and colleagues. They
showed that humans could be divided into different groups according to the
presence or absence of serum factors that would agglutinate red blood cells
isolated from other humans. We now know that these serum factors are
antibodies and that the corresponding antigens are glycan epitopes determined
by the inheritance of genes that, for the most part, encode
glycosyltransferases.

The A, B, and H blood group antigens are glycans presented on Type-1 or Type-2
LacNAc ([Figure 14.2](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f2/?report=objectonly)), on
O-GalNAc glycans (Type-3), or on glycolipids (Type-4) ([Figure
14.4](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f4/?report=objectonly)). The blood group
antigens are formed by the sequential action of glycosyltransferases encoded
by the _[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/)_ , _H_ , and _Se_ genes, now
termed the _ABO_ , _FUT1_ , and _FUT2_ loci ([Figure
14.5](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f5/?report=objectonly)). Blood group
antigen synthesis begins with modification of Type-1 or Type-2 LacNAc by the
transfer of α1-2Fuc to Gal to form the blood group H determinant. The _H_
allele encodes an α1-2FucT (FUT1) expressed in erythrocyte precursors and
transfers Fuc to Type-2 and Type-4 glycan units to form the H antigen on
erythrocytes ([Figure
14.4](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f4/?report=objectonly)). The _Se_ allele
encodes another α1-2FucT (FUT2) expressed in epithelial cells and uses Type-1
and Type-3 LacNAc to form the H antigen in epithelia lining the lumen of the
gastrointestinal, respiratory, and reproductive tracts and in salivary glands
([Figure 14.4](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f4/?report=objectonly)), as well
as modifying milk oligosaccharides to generate the H antigen.

A or B blood group determinants are subsequently formed from H Type-1, -2, -3,
or -4 determinants by glycosyltransferases encoded by the
_[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/)_ locus. The _A_ allele encodes the
α1-3GalNAcT that generates the A glycan epitope (A3GALNT), forming the A blood
group ([Figure 14.5](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f5/?report=objectonly)). The
_B_ allele of the _ABO_ locus encodes the α1-3GalT (A3GALT1) that forms the B
glycan determinant and generates the B blood group ([Figure
14.5](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f5/?report=objectonly)). _O_ alleles at the
_ABO_ locus encode a functionally inactive A/B glycosyltransferase.
Individuals who synthesize exclusively A determinants are blood group A and
have the genotype _AA_ or _AO_ , blood group B individuals are _BB_ or _BO_ ,
and individuals that express one _A_ and one _B_ allele have the genotype
_AB_. Blood group O individuals expressing inactive A/B glycosyltransferase
have the genotype _OO_. They express only the H antigen. Blood type
designations are the same as the blood group genotypes above. In terms of
nomenclature, the O blood group includes the H antigen and occasionally the
term ABO(H) is used.

The [ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) antigens are expressed on
membrane glycoproteins and glycolipids on the surface of erythrocytes and many
epithelial or endothelial cells in tissues. Some tissues also synthesize
soluble forms on secreted glycoproteins, glycolipids, and free glycans. As
discussed below, the ability to secrete soluble molecules carrying ABO(H)
blood group antigens is a genetically determined function of alleles at the
_Se_ ( _FUT2_ ) locus. On each human red blood cell, ∼80% of the one to two
million ABO(H) determinants are attached to the anion transport protein Band
3, and ∼15% are carried by the erythrocyte glucose transport protein Band 4.5.
Both of these integral membrane proteins carry ABO(H) antigens on a single
branched N-glycan with poly-LacNAc. Each erythrocyte has other glycoproteins
and approximately half a million glycolipids with ABO(H) determinants. Many of
these glycolipids have A, B, and H determinants on poly-LacNAc chains and have
been termed polyglycosylceramides or macroglycolipids. A, B, and H
determinants based on Type-4 chains ([Figure
14.4](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f4/?report=objectonly)) are also present in
human erythrocyte glycolipids.

A, B, and H determinants of the epidermis are primarily on Type-2 units,
whereas mucins of the gastric mucosa and in ovarian cyst fluid carry A, B, and
H antigens on Type-3 units ([Figure
14.4](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f4/?report=objectonly)). Epithelial cells
lining the digestive, respiratory, urinary, and reproductive tracts and
epithelia of some salivary and exocrine glands synthesize soluble forms of the
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/)(H) determinants, largely carried on
Type-1 units ([Figure
14.4](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f4/?report=objectonly)). Expression of the
A, B, and H determinants in secretory tissues is a function of the α1-2FucT
encoded by the _Se_ gene ( _FUT2_ ), because the _H_ gene is not expressed
there. Humans with an inactive _FUT2_ gene do not express soluble forms of the
A, B, or H determinants in saliva or milk oligosaccharides or in other tissues
and are termed “nonsecretors.”

Serology is used to characterize erythrocytes for transfusion and has
identified variants of the A and B blood group determinants that typically
yield weak reactivity with blood typing reagents. Interestingly, plant lectins
were used historically to aid in typing blood. For example, the lectin from
_Dolichos biflorus_ agglutinates erythrocytes from most blood group A
individuals (termed A1 individuals), but it does not agglutinate erythrocytes
from individuals of the A2 subgroup. The A1 and A2 subgroup antigens are
distinct ([Figure 14.5](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f5/?report=objectonly)).
These structural differences reflect the different catalytic activities of the
A transferases encoded by the A1 versus A2 allele in the
_[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/)_ locus.

Heritable erythrocyte antigenic polymorphisms determined by the
_[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/)_ locus have important medical
implications. Early in the postnatal period, the immune system generates IgM
antibodies against ABO antigen(s), even though they are absent from
erythrocytes. This is because glycan antigens similar or identical to the A
and B blood group determinants are carried by colonizing bacteria and fungi.
Thus, type-O individuals do not synthesize A or B determinants but show
relatively high titers of circulating IgM antibodies (termed isoagglutinins)
against A and B blood group determinants. Similarly, blood group B individuals
show circulating IgM anti-A isoagglutinins, but they do not make
isoagglutinins against the blood group B determinant, a “self” antigen.
Conversely, serum from blood group A individuals contains anti-B but not
anti-A antibodies. Finally, people with the AB blood group do not make either
anti-A or anti-B IgM isoagglutinins, because both are “self” antigens.
Anti-H(O) antibodies are not made in most people because a substantial
fraction are converted to A or B determinants or they are a “self” antigen.

IgM isoagglutinins efficiently trigger the complement cascade and circulate in
human plasma at titers sufficient to cause complement-dependent lysis of
transfused erythrocytes that display the corresponding blood group antigens.
Such rapid erythrocyte lysis causes an immediate, acute transfusion reaction,
which can lead to hypotension, shock, acute renal failure, and death from
circulatory collapse. This problem is avoided by ensuring that the
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) type of transfused erythrocytes is
compatible with the recipient's ABO type. Thus, an A recipient may receive
erythrocytes from A or O persons but not from a person of type B or AB. Blood
banks perform typing and cross-matching assays. First, units of erythrocyte
products typed for the A and B antigens are chosen to match the patient's ABO
type. To ensure that these are truly “compatible,” the patient's serum is
cross-matched by mixing with a small aliquot of each prospective erythrocyte
unit. Erythrocytes of compatible units do not agglutinate (form an erythrocyte
clump), whereas incompatibility is indicated by agglutinated erythrocytes
formed by antibodies in the patient's serum. Blood typing is used to ensure
compatibility not only for red blood cell transfusions but also for
transfusion with plasma. Similar ABO compatibility concerns are important in
heart, kidney, liver, and bone marrow transplantation procedures. The “type
and cross” procedures have virtually eliminated ABO blood group transfusion
reactions in the developed world. Attempts are being made to enzymatically
modify A or B erythrocytes to convert them to the “O” type, which is the
“universal donor” type. The few individuals with AB type are “universal
acceptors.”

Cross-matching procedures helped to identify a rare
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) blood group phenotype termed the
Bombay phenotype, so named because the first identified individual lived in
that city (now Mumbai). Affected persons have erythrocytes and tissue cells
lacking A, B, and H determinants because they have inactive _FUT1_ and _FUT2_
genes, and therefore no α1-2FucT enzyme. Bombay sera contain IgM antibodies
that react with erythrocytes from virtually all donors, including O
erythrocytes (H antigen-positive, A and B antigen-negative). They show robust
titers of anti-H, anti-A, and anti-B IgM antibodies and cannot receive
erythrocytes from any donor except those of the same Bombay blood type. A
related phenotype, termed para-Bombay, occurs in people with an inactive
_FUT1_ gene, but at least one functional _Se (FUT2)_ allele (secretor-
positive). The fact that Bombay individuals appear generally healthy implies
that developmental or physiological functions for the A, B, and H antigens, if
they ever existed, are no longer relevant. However, a variety of associations
have been made between the ABO blood group phenotype and relative risk for
infection by some pathogens and the acquisition of a spectrum of diseases. For
example, people with blood group O who are also Lewis-antigen positive (see
below) are the most susceptible to infection by _Helicobacter pylori_. This is
because _H. pylori_ binds well to glycans with terminal Fuc, such as the H and
Lewis antigens. The AB blood group is associated with infection by Brucella
(Brucellosis) and noroviruses that cause gastroenteritis. Blood group status
has also been associated with risk of stomach and pancreatic cancers. ABO
status may also be protective. Thus, enveloped viruses carry the ABO(H)
glycans of their hosts and are susceptible to lysis following infection of
another individual with an ABO-incompatible type. Finally, differences in
susceptibility to severe complications of malaria appear to be affected by ABO
blood groups. Protective mechanisms relevant to these roles for blood group
determinants may explain why the ABO system has survived more than 50 million
years of primate evolution, including likely reinventions.

The Lewis blood group antigens are a related set of glycans that carry
α1-3/α1-4 Fuc residues ([Figure
14.6](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f6/?report=objectonly)). The term “Lewis”
derives from a family who suffered from a red blood cell incompatibility. The
Lewis a antigen (Lea) is synthesized by an α1-3/α1-4FucT (FUT3) encoded by the
_Lewis_ ( _LE_ or _FUT3_ ) blood group locus. The Lewis b antigen (Leb) is
synthesized by the concerted actions of FUT3 and FUT2. Secretor-positive
individuals express FUT2 and convert Type-1 units to Type-1 H determinants
that may be acted on by FUT3 to form the Leb determinant ([Figure
14.6](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f6/?report=objectonly)). Nonsecretors who
do not synthesize Type-1 H determinants in secretory epithelia express the Lea
determinant via FUT3 ([Figure
14.6](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f6/?report=objectonly)). Individuals with
an inactive _FUT3_ locus (∼10%–20% of the population), are termed Lewis-
negative. Lewis-negative secretors express Type-I H determinants that cannot
be converted to Lea or Leb determinants. Lewis-negative nonsecretors express
Type-1 units that are devoid of Fuc.

Expression of Lea and Leb glycans and FUT3 is largely restricted to the same
epithelia that express FUT2. Thus, soluble forms of these antigens are
released into secretions and body fluids. Lea and Leb antigens are also
detectable on erythrocytes. However, the precursors of erythrocytes do not
synthesize these determinants. Instead, Lewis antigens are acquired by the
erythrocyte membrane through passive adsorption of Lewis-positive glycolipids
that circulate in plasma in lipoprotein complexes and aqueous dispersions.
Antibodies against the Lea antigens have been implicated in occasional
transfusion reactions.

Because of structural similarities, the term “Lewis antigen” was applied to
other glycan sequences and includes the Lewis x (Lex) and Lewis y (Ley)
determinants and forms of the Lea and Lex determinants that are sialylated
and/or sulfated ([Figure
14.6](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f6/?report=objectonly)). These glycan
epitopes are formed through the actions of FUT4, FUT5, FUT6, and/or FUT7. Some
Lewis blood group antigens have important functions in selectin-dependent
leukocyte extravasation and tumor-cell metastasis. Most strongly implicated
are the sialylated and/or sulfated determinants represented by sialyl Lex and
its sulfated variants ([Figure
14.6](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f6/?report=objectonly)), which function as
selectin ligands on glycoproteins and glycolipids of leukocytes and tumor
cells ([Chapters 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/) and [47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)).
The Lewis blood group antigens have also been proposed to function in the
pathogenesis of _H. pylori_ , the causative agent in chronic active gastritis
associated with hypertrophic gastropathy, duodenal ulcer, gastric
adenocarcinoma, and gastrointestinal lymphoma ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Also, Lewis antigens may be expressed on
glycoproteins in plants ([Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)).

The P1PK blood group includes the P1 and Pk antigens. Their synthesis involves
two pathways, each beginning with lactosylceramide ([Figure
14.7](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f7/?report=objectonly)). The Pk antigen is
synthesized by an α1-4GalT (Pk transferase; A4GALT) and may be modified by a
β1-3GalNAcT (P transferase; B3GALNT1) to form the P antigen. In the second
pathway, P1-antigen biosynthesis begins with two reactions leading to
paragloboside, which is acted on by A4GALT to form the P1 antigen, the most
common P blood group. Individuals with this blood group possess both pathways,
and their erythrocytes express P and P1 antigens and small amounts of Pk not
converted into P determinants. Individuals with an inactive P1 transferase are
quite common and express the P2 blood group. Their erythrocytes show normal
levels of P and Pk antigens but are deficient in P1 determinants. Antibodies
against P, P1, and Pk determinants have been implicated in transfusion
reactions. Complement-fixing, cold-reactive anti-P antibodies known as
“Donath–Landsteiner” antibodies cause intravascular hemolysis observed in a
syndrome called paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (see [Chapter
46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/)).

Various uropathogenic strains of _Escherichia coli_ express adhesins that bind
to the terminal Galα1-4Gal moiety of the Pk and P1 antigens ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). The P1 determinant is expressed on the urothelium
and probably facilitates infection by mediating attachment of bacteria. P1
individuals have a higher relative risk for urinary tract infections and
pyelonephritis. The adhesion of a pyelonephritic strain of _E. coli_ to renal
tissue is mediated by a bacterial adhesin specific for the Galα1-4Gal epitope,
and deficiency of the adhesin severely attenuates the pyelonephritic activity
of the organism. The P blood group antigens may also have a role as receptors
for human parvovirus B19. This virus causes erythema infectiosum and leads to
congenital anemia and hydrops fetalis following infection in utero. It is also
associated with transient aplastic crisis in patients with hemolytic anemia
and with cases of pure erythrocyte aplasia and chronic anemia in
immunocompromised individuals. Parvovirus B19 replication is restricted to
erythroid progenitor cells. An adhesive interaction between the virion and
glycolipids with P antigen is involved in viral infection of erythroid
progenitors.

Mammals make a series of oligosaccharides with a core of lactose (Galβ1-4Glc)
and secrete them into the milk. Human milk comprises many hundreds of
different glycans with small amounts of glycans containing greater than
fifteen sugars. The distribution of structures and amount of each
oligosaccharide vary between individuals and during the lactation cycle. There
is a relatively high concentration of complex, sialylated, and fucosylated
oligosaccharides in milk, and these glycans appear to protect infants against
enteric pathogens. Interestingly, in individuals that are “nonsecretors” and
Lewis-negative, fucosylated glycans are not present beyond 2’-fucosyllactose,
and the overall repertoire of oligosaccharides is reduced. Most other mammals
synthesize lactose but also express species-specific repertoires of glycans
that largely differ from humans—often being much simpler—but may have similar
functions. Beside lactose, which is nutritionally important, the larger human
milk oligosaccharides are thought to be important in infant immunoprotection
and to have prebiotic activity by contributing to the development of healthy
microbiota. Surprisingly, there is essentially no information on the hormone-
regulated biosynthesis of these abundant glycans.
[Lactose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/lactose/) is generated by a β1-4
galactosyltransferase (acting as lactose synthase) only in the lactating
mammary gland, because of the lactation-specific expression of the modifier
protein α-lactalbumin, which causes the enzyme to transfer Gal from UDP-Gal to
Glc rather than to GlcNAc. Even though this process has been demonstrated to
occur in intact Golgi, the precise mechanisms of how lactose is modified by
addition of other sugars by specific glycosyltransferases during lactation are
unknown. It is assumed that the same enzymes involved in making termini of
other glycan classes are responsible.

The Galα1-3Gal epitope (often called “alpha-Gal”) is synthesized on Type-2
units on glycolipids and glycoproteins by a specific α1-3GalT ([Figure
14.8](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f8/?report=objectonly)). This epitope and
the α1-3GalT that synthesizes it are expressed by New World primates and many
nonprimate mammals, but the α1-3GalT gene is inactivated in humans and Old
World primates. Mice engineered to lack the α1-3GalT develop cataracts.
Species that do not express the Galα1-3Gal epitope, including humans, carry
anti-Galα1-3Gal antibodies, likely because of immunization through exposure to
the Galα1-3Gal epitope on microbes and food. Anti-Galα1-3Gal antibodies
present a major barrier to the use of porcine and other nonprimate organs for
xenotransplantation in humans, because they bind to Galα1-3Gal epitopes on the
vascular endothelium of xenotransplants and cause hyperacute graft rejection
through complement-mediated endothelial cell cytotoxicity. Efforts are in
progress to overcome this barrier by using animal organ donors that have been
genetically modified. Approaches include transgenic expression of enzymes,
such as FUT1, that diminishes Galα1-3Gal expression by diverting Type-2 units
toward H antigen synthesis. Unfortunately, pig tissues lacking Galα1-3Gal
elicit a graft rejection reaction to other pig antigens. Anti-Galα1-3Gal
antibodies have also been shown to significantly diminish the infective
efficiency of recombinant retroviruses. The problem has been solved through
the generation of packaging cell lines that are deficient in α1-3GalT.
Recombinant glycoproteins for therapeutic use in humans must also be prepared
in cells that do not express α1-3GalT. Severe allergies to red meat
consumption can occur when high titer IgE antibodies against this epitope
appear in adult humans, claimed to be the consequence of a prior bite by the
Lone Star tick, which may be expressing the same epitope in its saliva.

The Forssman antigen (also known as globopentosylceramide) is a glycolipid
that contains terminal α1-3GalNAc linked to the terminal GlcNAc of globoside
transferred by the α1-3 GalNAcT (GBGT1), which is related in sequence to
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) transferases ([Figure
14.8](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f8/?report=objectonly)). The Forssman
antigen, first discovered in sheep erythrocytes by John Frederick Forssman, is
expressed during embryonic and adult stages in many mammals. Humans have a
mutated GBGT1 and cannot synthesize the Forssman antigen but carry anti-
Forssman antibodies in their serum. Rare individuals have a reversion mutation
that restores activity to GBGT1, and synthesis of the Forssman antigen. Anti-
Forssman antibodies may contribute to the pathogenesis of Guillain–Barré
syndrome by binding to cross-reactive glycolipid components of peripheral
nerve myelin. It is interesting that anti-Forssman antibodies can disrupt
tight junction formation, apical–basal polarization, and cell adhesion.

Glycans with sulfated terminal β-linked GalNAc are found on the pituitary
glycoprotein hormones lutropin (LH) and thyrotropin (TSH) but not on follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH), although it is made in the same cells. These
heterodimeric glycoproteins contain a common α subunit and a unique β subunit,
each with biantennary N-glycans. The N-glycans of TSH and LH have an unusual
4-O–sulfated GalNAc attached to GlcNAc residues ([Figure
14.9](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f9/?report=objectonly)). This contrasts
with the N-glycans on FSH (and most N-glycans), in which GlcNAc residues are
substituted with β1-4Gal, often extended by α2-3 or α2-6 sialic acid residues
([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). A free α subunit common to LH, TSH, and
FSH is present in pituitary cells and it also carries this determinant, as do
other glycoproteins synthesized by the pituitary and elsewhere, (e.g., on the
O-glycans of proopiomelanocortin). Synthesis of the sulfated GalNAc
determinant is controlled by a β1-4GalNAcT, either B4GALNT3 or B4GALNT4
([Figure 14.9](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f9/?report=objectonly)). The
terminal β1-4GalNAc is then sulfated by a sulfotransferase (CHST8 or CHST11)
also expressed in pituitary cells. In some tissues, including the pituitary,
the β1-4GalNAc is substituted by an α2-6 sialic acid residue. Both β1-4GalNAcT
and β1-4GalT enzymes are expressed in pituitary cells, but the N-glycans on LH
and TSH carry the uncommon β1-4GalNAc, whereas the N-glycans on FSH carry the
common β1-4Gal residue. This protein-specific glycosylation is a consequence
of interactions between B4GALNT3 or B4GALNT4 and a specific peptide motif
present on the combined αβ subunits of LH and TSH. This interaction causes an
increase in the catalytic efficiency of the β1-4GalNAcT that modifies
biantennary N-glycans on LH and TSH at the expense of the competing β1-4GalT.
Importantly, the peptide motif recognized by the β1-4GalNAcT is not present in
the β subunit of FSH, and the recognition motif on the α subunit of FSH is not
accessible to the enzyme. Consequently, the biantennary N-glycans on FSH are
modified exclusively by a β1-4GalT.

These differential glycosylation events have profound consequences for the
ovulatory cycle in vertebrates. Circulating LH levels increase and decrease in
a highly pulsatile manner. This assures maximal stimulation of the ovarian LH
receptor at the preovulatory surge, because sustained high LH levels would
lead to LH receptor desensitization. The increase and decrease in LH levels is
due, in part, to pulsatile release of the hormone by the pituitary. However,
the peaks and troughs are accentuated markedly by the rapid clearance of LH
from the circulation mediated via recognition of its terminal sulfated-
GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc determinant(s). The “mannose receptor” MRC1 is expressed in
the liver by hepatic endothelial cells and by Kupffer cells. LH binding is
followed by internalization and lysosomal degradation. MRC1 is also expressed
in macrophages. In liver, MRC1 recognizes sulfated-GalNAc via an R-type lectin
domain, whereas in macrophages, the same receptor recognizes mannose via an
L-type lectin domain ([Chapters 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/) and
[32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/)).

The addition of GalNAc to Gal already substituted with α2-3Sia may also occur
on glycoproteins and glycolipids ([Figure
14.10](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f10/?report=objectonly)). On
glycoproteins, this structure forms the human Sda blood group, which is
expressed by most individuals. In mice, the Sda antigen was first described on
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and was termed the CT antigen. On glycolipids,
the same trisaccharide terminus is shared by the ganglioside GM2 ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). A related structure to the Sda antigen called the
Cad antigen [GalNAcβ1-4(Neu5Acα2-3)Galβ1-3(Neu5Acα2-6)] is found in O-glycans
and glycolipids. The human Sda antigen was first sequenced in N-glycans of
Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein from human urine. Both human and mouse β1-4GalNAcTs
(B4GALNT1 and B4GALNT2) transfer GalNAc to N- and O-glycans on glycoproteins,
but not to the glycolipid GM3 (Siaα2-3Galβ1-4Glc-Cer), even though both can
efficiently use 3-sialyllactose (Siaα2-3Galβ1-4Glc) as a substrate in vitro.
In the mouse, Sda antigens are recognized by IgM monoclonal antibodies termed
CT1 and CT2, which were isolated for their ability to block lysis of cellular
targets by a murine CTL clone. Rare humans lack the determinant and form
naturally occurring antibodies against it, but they show no apparent
pathophysiology. Mice with a dominantly inherited form of von Willebrand's
disease express B4GALNT1 aberrantly in vascular endothelium. The presence of
the β1-4GalNAcT in this abnormal location generates von Willebrand factor
(VWF) carrying the Sda determinant. This VWF glycoform is rapidly cleared from
the circulation by the asialoglycoprotein receptor in liver, leading to VWF
deficiency and hemorrhagic disease.

The glycolipid equivalent of the Sda determinant, termed GM2, which is
synthesized by GM2 synthase (B4GALNT1) ([Figure
14.10](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f10/?report=objectonly)), is widely
expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in the adrenal
gland. Mice homozygous for a null mutation in _B4galnt1_ show modest
conduction defects in the peripheral nervous system and male sterility
([Chapter 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)).

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) in α2-3 linkage are
found on N-glycans, O-glycans, and glycolipids generated by six different α2-3
sialyltransferases (ST3GAL1 to ST3GAL6). ST3GAL3 and ST3GAL4 are broadly
expressed in mammals. In mouse, _St3gal1_ transcripts are most abundant in the
spleen, liver, bone marrow, thymus, and salivary glands. St3gal2 expression is
most abundant in brain, where α2-3-sialylated glycolipids are common. St3gal5
is expressed well in brain, skeletal muscle, adrenals, and liver, and St3gal6
is most expressed in testes. In vertebrates, α2-3 sialic acid residues are
found on terminal Gal residues. The addition of α2-3 sialic acid to Gal
inhibits the action of other enzymes, including α1-2FucTs, α1-3GalT, GlcNAcTs,
and GalNAcTs, which compete with terminal α2-3 sialyltransferases. Although
most α2-3 sialic acid on glycoproteins is found on complex N-glycans ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) and O-GalNAc glycans ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)), sialylation also occurs on O-fucose and O-mannose
glycans found on a limited subset of glycoproteins ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). As discussed above and in [Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/), selectin ligands are α2-3-sialylated glycans.

Glycans bearing α2-3 sialic acid contribute to the circulating half-life of
plasma glycoproteins by “masking” terminal Gal residues that contribute to the
removal of glycoproteins from serum by the asialoglycoprotein receptor
([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). ST3GAL1 generates
Siaα2-3Galβ1-3GalNAcα-Ser/Thr that is important for the viability of
peripheral CD8+ T cells. Mice lacking ST3GAL1 show decreased cytotoxic T-cell
responses with an increase in the apoptotic death of naïve CD8+ T cells
([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)).

Sialic acid recognition is important for binding by viruses and bacteria.
Binding to sialic acid and subsequent release by neuraminidase are important
for infection by influenza virus. Sialic acid residues in α2-3 linkage are
recognized by the hemagglutinin (HA) in the envelope of influenza viruses from
birds and pigs. Human influenza viruses bind more commonly to sialic acid
residues in α2-6 linkage. Mutations in the HA gene of influenza viruses from
birds may lead to a human influenza pandemic partly due to their enhanced
ability to infect human cells through HA recognition of α2-6Neu5Ac ([Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Glycans bearing α2-3 sialic acid residues have
also been implicated in bacterial pathogenesis. Glycans terminating in α2-3
sialic acid residues support the adhesion of _H. pylori_ , which causes
gastritis, gastric ulcers, and stomach cancer. The ganglioside GM1
(Galβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-4[Siaα2-3]Galβ1-4GlcβCer) is a receptor for cholera toxin
produced by _Vibrio cholerae_ and the heat-labile enterotoxin (LT-1) produced
by enterotoxigenic _E. coli_ ([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).
[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/)-based inhibitors are currently
under evaluation in humans for their ability to diminish the symptoms and
progression of cholera. A variety of other pathogens and toxins bind to
sialylated termini bearing one of many possible modified sialic acids
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

Sialic acid in α2-6 linkage is found on N-glycans, O-glycans, and glycolipids.
Two α2-6 sialyltransferases, ST6GAL1 and ST6GAL2, transfer to Gal, whereas
ST6GALNAC1 through ST6GALNAC6 transfer to GalNAc ([Figure
14.11](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f11/?report=objectonly)). In vertebrates,
α2-6 sialic acid is found on terminal Gal, on terminal or subterminal GlcNAc,
or, in the case of reactions catalyzed by ST6GALNAC3, on an internal GalNAc.
α2-6 Sialic acid is less common than α2-3 sialic acid. Glycans with terminal
α2-6 sialic acid are generally not modified further. In mouse, _St6gal1_ is
expressed at a relatively high level in hepatocytes and lymphocytes and is
responsible for α2-6 sialylation of serum glycoproteins and glycoproteins of
the antigen receptor complex in lymphocytes. _St6gal2_ expression is mainly
restricted to the embryonic and adult brain, and its functions are currently
unknown.

The α2-6–sialylated glycans from ST6GALNAC1 and ST6GALNAC2 are restricted to
O-glycans. ST6GALNAC3 is responsible for transferring α2-6 sialic acid to the
GalNAcα-Ser/Thr core of O-GalNAc glycans and to GalNAc in glycolipids.
ST6GALNAC4, ST6GALNAC5, and ST6GALNAC6 appear to use glycolipids as preferred
acceptors. Many strains of influenza infectious for humans bind terminal α2-6
sialic acid residues ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)), and glycoproteins
bearing α2-6 sialylation can be cleared from the circulation by the
asialoglycoprotein receptor ([Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)).

Mice lacking ST6GAL1 show diminished antibody responses to T-lymphocyte-
dependent and -independent antigens, reduced B-lymphocyte proliferation in
response, reduced B cell surface IgM and CD22 levels, ∼65% reduction in serum
IgM levels, and reduced B cell receptor (BCR) signaling ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). The extracellular domain of CD22 on B lymphocytes
specifically recognizes Siaα2-6Galβ1-4GlcNAc-. In the absence of α2-6 sialic
acid on glycans, CD22 shows increased clustering with the BCR, and BCR
signaling is down-regulated.

Glycans modified by α2-8 sialylation occur in vertebrates mainly in developing
brain and are carried primarily on the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM.
α2-8-sialylated glycans are also expressed on a few glycoproteins in
noneuronal cells and on tumor cells. There are six α2-8 sialyltransferases,
ST8SIA1 through ST8SIA6, that transfer sialic acid in α2-8 linkage to a
terminal α2-3 or α2-6-linked sialic acid, generally on an N-glycan ([Figure
14.12](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f12/?report=objectonly)). ST8SIA2 (also
called STX) and ST8SIA4 (also called PST) catalyze the synthesis of linear
polymers of up to 400 α2-8 sialic acid residues to give polysialic acid
(PolySia or PSA) on NCAM. Both ST8SIA2 and ST8SIA4 are autocatalytic and
synthesize PolySia on their own N-glycans, although polysialylation is not a
prerequisite for their sialyltransferase activity. Thus, some cultured cells
that do not express a known substrate of these sialytransferases may express
surface PolySia when transfected with ST8SIA2 or ST8SIA4 due to their
autosialylation. Glycoproteins with N-glycans carrying only one α2-8 sialic
acid or two (disialic acid) to seven α2-8 sialic acids (oligosialic acid) have
been described and may be synthesized by ST8SIA3. However, functional studies
have focused on PolySia on NCAM ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

PolySia is highly negatively charged, highly hydrated, and contributes up to
one third of the molecular mass of NCAM. The embryonic form of NCAM is
extensively modified by PolySia, which exerts an antiadhesive effect and
reduces homotypic interactions. PolySia can also diminish interactions
promoted by other adhesion molecules, including L1-dependent attachment to
laminin or collagen and also binds extracellular signaling molecules like BDNF
and FGF-2. Mice lacking ST8SIA4 show reduced PSA in certain brain regions and
have altered neuronal responses in the hippocampal CA1 region. Mice lacking
ST8SIA2 have a distinct neuronal phenotype because of misguided migration of a
subset of hippocampal neurons and ectopic synapses. When both ST8SIA2 and
ST8SIA4 are inactivated, mice have severe neuronal and other problems and die
precociously. However, this phenotype is rescued by also removing NCAM in a
triple-knockout strain. This shows that the presence of NCAM lacking PSA is a
major cause of the severe defects in double-knockout mice ([Chapter
41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)).

Certain glycolipids also carry α2-8 sialic acid linkages, which are
constructed by three α2-8 sialyltransferases termed ST8SIA1 (also known as GD3
synthase), ST8SIA3, and ST8SIA5 ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). They
generate single or oligomeric α2-8 sialic acid resiudes but not polymeric PSA.
The three enzymes are generally thought to act primarily on glycolipid
substrates, but in vitro studies suggest that ST8SIA3 can also use N-glycans
to generate oligosialic acids. These α2-8 sialyltransferases are expressed in
the brain, where each shows a distinct developmentally regulated expression
pattern. ST8SIA1 is also present in kidney and thymus. In vitro experiments
imply that certain α2-8-sialylated glycolipids may participate in signal
transduction processes in neuronal cell types. Inactivation of the ST8SIA1
gene in the mouse causes alterations in sensory neuron responses to pain.

In principle, any free hydroxyl group on a monosaccharide could be modified by
sulfation or phosphorylation. However, in vertebrates, glycan sulfation is
restricted to Gal, GlcNAc, GlcA, and GalNAc at internal or terminal positions,
and phosphorylation has been observed only on Man and Xyl to date. The
internally sulfated glycans in heparin, heparan sulfate (HS), and chondroitin
sulfate (CS) proteoglycans and the sulfated N-glycans on keratan sulfate are
discussed in [Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/). This chapter describes
sulfated glycans recognized by L-selectin, the HNK-1 epitope, and the
pituitary glycoprotein hormones mentioned above. [Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/) also mentions transient phosphorylation of the Xyl
that initiates the proteoglycan core. Mannose phosphorylation is described in
[Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/), [13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/), and
[33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/). Parasites, fungi, and bacteria have a wide
variety of phosphorylated glycans ([Chapters 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/),
[22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/), [23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/), and
[43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)). However, glycan sulfation is remarkably rare in
prokaryotes.

In vertebrates, L-selectin on lymphocytes binds to the high endothelial
venules (HEVs) in lymph nodes through recognition of L-selectin ligands
present on O-GalNAc glycans of HEV glycoproteins. Sulfated forms of the sialyl
Lewis x determinant ([Figure
14.6](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f6/?report=objectonly)) provide an
essential contribution to L-selectin recognition of these glycoproteins.
Sulfation occurs at C-6 of Gal by CHST1 and C-6 of GlcNAc by CHST2, both of
which contribute to L-selectin ligand activity. Mice lacking the two
sulfotransferases show almost no homing of lymphocytes to HEV. The
biosynthesis of sulfated L-selectin ligands and the enzymes that participate
in this process are discussed in [Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/). Sulfated
forms of the sialyl Lewis x determinant are also thought to contribute to
Siglec recognition, as mentioned in [Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/).

The HNK-1 antigen is a terminally sulfated glycan that was first described on
human natural killer cells, and is also called CD57. The HNK-1 epitope is
expressed in the vertebrate nervous system, and expression patterns change
during neural development ([Chapter 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)). The HNK-1
determinant comprises 3-O-sulfated GlcA attached in α1-3 linkage to a terminal
Gal ([Figure 14.12](/books/NBK453042/figure/ch14.f12/?report=objectonly)) of
N-glycans, O-glycans, proteoglycans, and glycolipids. Two different GlcA-
transferases participate in HNK-1 GlcA addition: GlcAT-P (B3GAT1) and GlcAT-S
(B3GAT2). They have very different activities for glycoprotein or glycolipid
substrates in vitro and may generate functionally different HNK-1 epitopes in
vivo. Glucuronylation is followed by 3-O sulfation of the GlcA by one or more
sulfotransferases. The HNK-1 epitope is present on a variety of neuronal cell
glycoproteins, including NCAM, contactin, myelin-associated glycoprotein,
telencephalin, L1, and P0 (the major glycoprotein of peripheral nerve myelin).
There is evidence that HNK-1 can function as a ligand for laminin, L-selectin,
P-selectin, and a cerebellar adhesion protein termed amphoterin. HNK-1 has
also been shown to mediate homotypic adhesive interactions involving P0.
HNK-1-dependent adhesive interactions have been implicated in cell migration
processes involving cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions and are proposed to
participate in reinnervation of muscles by motor neurons.

Phosphorylation of sugars is also important in recognition events. In mammals,
the phosphorylation of Man on oligomannose N-glycans at the C-6 position of
lysosomal hyrolases occurs by a phospho-GlcNAc transferase to created a
GlcNAc-phospho-6-Mannose diester ([Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and
[33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). Subsequent removal of the GlcNAc exposes
monophosphoester Man-6-P for recognition of lysosomal hydrolases by the
Man-6-P receptors. Interestingly, mannose-1-6-phosphate-mannose is a common
modification in yeast mannans on their cell walls. Phosphorylation of the C-2
of the Xyl that initiates proteoglycan core linker synthesis is mediated by a
Golgi kinase Fam20B and is essential for addition of the second Gal in the
core linker GlcAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-Ser/Thr core. The phosphate must be
removed by a phosphatase, PXYLP1, before GlcA can be added to the core linker,
generating the substrate for HS, CS, or DS addition. Interestingly, a GlcNAc
may be added to the phosphorylated trisaccharide to block extension of the
core linker glycan. This regulation by Xyl phosphorylation is essential for
physiological homeostasis of proteoglycans ([Chapters
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/) and [41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)). In another
example of regulation by phosphorylation, the Golgi kinase POMK phosphorylates
the C-6 position of the O-Man that initiates O-mannose glycans on
α-dystroglycan, and this has been shown to be essential for the subsequent
action of the glycosyltransferase LARGE, which adds a GlcA β1-3Xyl polymer to
the O-Man core ([Chapters 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/) and
[45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Jason W. Labonte.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.015

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) are abundant on
vertebrate glycoproteins and have diverse functional roles. Originally
discovered within the Deuterostome lineage of animals and associated microbes,
they are actually a subset of a more ancient family of 9-carbon backbone
monosaccharides called nonulosonic acids, which are also found in some
Eubacteria and Archaea. All nonulosonic acids share unusual biosynthetic
pathways and are remarkable for the number of molecular components carried on
one monosaccharide, including a carboxylic acid, a 3-carbon exocyclic side
chain, and often one or more acylated amino groups. Further complexity arising
from various modifications, as well as diverse linkages at terminal positions
of glycans, makes them well suited to carry information for glycan–protein,
cell–cell, and pathogen–cell recognition. Given their high density and
location on vertebrate cells, sialic acids also exert many functions via
electronegative charge, such as repulsion of cell–cell interactions, protein
stabilization, ion binding, and ion transport. They are among the most rapidly
evolving classes of glycans in nature.

The nomenclature of these molecules is tied to their discovery, being first
isolated by Gunnar Blix from salivary mucins in 1936 and independently by
Ernst Klenk from brain glycolipids in 1941. Blix named his substance “sialic
acid” after the Greek word for saliva (σίαλον), and Klenk named his
“neuraminic acid” for neurons in the brain. By the time the relationship of
these substances became evident, both names were already in use, and they have
persisted. Although 5- _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) is the most common
sialic acid (Sia) in humans, the Sia family is comprised of related structures
([Figure 15.1](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f1/?report=objectonly)) that vary
at the C-5 carbon, including 5- _N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc) and
2-keto-deoxynonulosonic acid (Kdn), with a hydroxyl group at C-5. Neuraminic
acid (Neu) with a free amino group can also exist in nature, only in
glycosidic linkage.

In the 1980s, similar 9-carbon backbone 2-keto acid sugars were discovered in
some bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) and reported as “bacterial sialic
acids.” The resulting confusion was resolved in 2009 by suggesting that the
term “sialic acid” be limited to its original use in describing neuraminic
acid, deoxynonulosonic acid, and their derivatives in deuterostomes and their
pathogens, and that the term “nonulosonic acid” (NulO) encompasses the entire
group of 9-carbon non-2-ulosonic acids ([Figure
15.1](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f1/?report=objectonly)).

A well-characterized microbial NulO is legionaminic acid (Leg), in the LPS of
_Legionella pneumophila_. Like Neu5Ac, it has a D-glycero-D-galacto
conformation, but with an N-acetyl group instead of a hydroxyl at C-7 and no
hydroxyl at C-9. Pseudomonas species express pseudaminic acid (Pse), which has
the same structure as Leg but in a different stereochemical configuration
([Figure 15.1](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f1/?report=objectonly)). Later
discoveries of NulOs such as 4epi-Leg (4eLeg), 8epi-Leg (8eLeg), and
acinetaminic acid (Aci) ([Figure
15.1](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f1/?report=objectonly)) indicate that such
molecules are widespread in nature. Biosynthesis of all NulOs proceeds through
similar enzymatic mechanisms, originating by condensation of a 6-carbon
monosaccharide with 3-carbon pyruvate, and then being activated to a CMP-
sugar, before transfer to glycan acceptors. Genetic evidence suggests that
NulOs likely arose from homologous gene products that synthesize keto-
deoxyoctulosonic acid (Kdo), a related 8-carbon α-keto sugar acid that is also
unusual in being activated as a CMP-sugar ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). Thus, NulOs appear to be an ancient invention by
the common ancestor of life-forms, but then persisted only in some taxa,
eventually becoming prominent as Sias when the Deuterostome lineage of animals
emerged, at the Cambrian Explosion ∼530 million years ago. Gene sequence
homologies indicate that certain microbes then modified the ancient genes of
the NulO biosynthetic pathway, reinventing vertebrate-like Sias by convergent
evolution, evidently to evade the vertebrate immune system via molecular
mimicry. The rest of this chapter focuses mostly on traditional Sias in
Deuterostomes and their pathogens, and the prokaryotic NulOs are again
mentioned in chapters on Eubacteria ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)) and
Archaea ([Chapter 22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)).

Complete chemical names of NulOs are rather cumbersome for routine use. Beyond
the eight currently known core units ([Figure
15.1](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f1/?report=objectonly)), additional
substitutions are designated by letter codes (Ac = acetyl, Gc = glycolyl, Me =
methyl, Lt = lactyl, and S = sulfate), and these are listed along with numbers
indicating their location relative to the carbons (e.g., 9- _O_ -acetyl-8- _O_
-methyl- _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid is Neu5,9Ac28Me). If one is uncertain of
the exact type of molecule present, the generic abbreviations Sia or NulO
should be used. Partial structural information can also be incorporated. For
example, a Sia of otherwise unknown type with an acetyl substitution at the
C-9 position could be written as Sia9Ac. With regard to the bacterial NulOs,
the names Leg, Pse, 4eLeg, 8eLeg, and Aci are often used synonymously with the
5,7-di- _N_ -acetylated forms of these molecules ([Figure
15.1](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f1/?report=objectonly)). Ideally, the
former terms could be reserved for the free amino forms of these molecules (as
with Neu).

The most common Sia in humans is Neu5Ac, a relatively strong acid (pKa of 2.6)
because the C-1 carboxylate is attached to the C-2 anomeric carbon. The
exocyclic glycerol-like side chain (C-7, C-8, and C-9, each carrying a
hydroxyl group) provides opportunities for hydrogen bonding. The N-acetyl
group facilitates hydrophobic interactions, changing to hydrophilic properties
with an N-glycolyl group. Each of these moieties can participate in binding
specificities and functions of Sia-containing glycans.

Many publications assume that Neu5Ac (sometimes called NANA) is the Sia
present in a given biological sample, and it is indeed common in vertebrates.
But a second level of diversity arises from various natural modifications,
some of which are also common. The four “core” Sia molecules (Neu5Ac, Neu5Gc,
Kdn, and Neu) sometimes carry one or more additional substitutions on the
hydroxyl groups at C-4, C-7, C-8, and C-9. These include O-acetyl, O-methyl,
O-sulfate, or O-lactyl groups. The carboxylate group at C-1 can condense with
hydroxyl groups of adjacent sugars to form an uncharged lactone or with a free
amino group at C-5 to form an uncharged lactam. Such modifications can
determine or modify recognition by Sia-binding proteins and direct Sia
function. Despite this complexity, it may be sufficient in some biological
studies to simply know that a generic Sia residue is present at the terminal
position of a glycan under study. Dehydro Sias also exist in nature. For
example, Neu2en5Ac (2-deoxy-2,3-di-dehydro- _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid,
sometimes called DANA) has natural inhibitory properties toward sialidases and
was the starting point for synthesis of more potent inhibitors such as the
anti-influenza drug Relenza ([Chapter 57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)).

Diversity also results from different ways that Sias are linked to underlying
glycan chains ([Figure
15.2](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f2/?report=objectonly)) via their C-2
anomeric carbon in α-configuration, commonly to the C-3 or C-6 positions of
galactose, to the C-6 position of _N_ -acetylgalactosamine, or to the C-8 or
C-9 position of another sialic acid. Sialyltransferases (STs) generate each of
these linkage types. There are 20 known genes in mice and humans encoding STs
synthesizing these four major linkages, with relative or absolute
specificities for other details of the underlying glycan. Differential ST gene
expression thus generates different sets of sialoglycans varying in their
underlying glycan structures. STs mostly function in the _trans_ -Golgi and
use the nucleotide sugar CMP-Sia as a donor ([Chapters
4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/) and [5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). Fascinating
exceptions discussed below are the _trans_ -sialidases of certain pathogens,
which can directly “steal” sialic acids from termini of host glycans and
transfer them to their own surface glycans, as a cloaking mechanism.

The sum total of the diversity of sialoglycans in a cell or organism is dubbed
its “sialome.” As mentioned, Sias are often found as the terminal (outermost)
saccharide on branches of N-glycans, O-glycans, and glycosphingolipids
([Figure 15.3](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f3/?report=objectonly)) and
occasionally capping side chains of GPI anchors ([Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). A useful conceptualization of the sialome is as a
“forest canopy” of the cell-surface glycan “forest” (the whole glycome). At
the outermost level are different Sia structures (leaves and flowers), which
are in glycosidic linkage to underlying linear and branched oligosaccharides
(stems and branches), which in turn are components of glycoproteins and
glycolipids (the trees). At the cell surface, glycolipids and glycoproteins
organize into lateral domains (forests). Just as the forest varies greatly
from place to place, the sialome varies among cell types and among domains on
a given cell surface, variations that serve specific functions. As with the
glycome, each cell type in each species expresses its own distinct sialome.
For example, although mammalian liver sialoglycans are most abundant on
glycoproteins, brain sialoglycans are much more abundant as sialoglycolipids
([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)), so much so that they are termed
“gangliosides” for the nerve ganglia on which they were discovered. The
sialome not only differs among species and cell types but also varies markedly
with regard to time, space, and environmental cues.

In vertebrates, the terminal Sia of a glycan chain is rarely extended further,
except with another Sia ([Figure
15.3](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f3/?report=objectonly)). However, Sias can
occur as an internal glycan component in repeating units of some bacterial
polysaccharides and in some invertebrates such as echinoderms. In the latter,
the C-4 hydroxyl is sometimes glycosylated with other monosaccharides such as
fucose and galactose. Overall, it appears that we do not yet know the full
extent of sialoglycan diversity in nature.

[Polysialic acid](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/polysialicacid/) (polySia,
previously called PSA) is a linear homopolymer of Sias that sometimes reaches
lengths of more than 100 residues. Shorter chains, often two to three
residues, called oligosialic acid, are common components of gangliosides
(Figure 15.3 and [Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) and are found
occasionally as terminal structures on glycoprotein glycans. PolySia is a
prominent structural feature of a highly select group of acceptor proteins,
the best studied of which is the neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM).
Beginning early in vertebrate brain development, long polySia chains
(Neu5Acα2-8)n are added to NCAM (often then called PSA-NCAM), on the termini
of two specific N-glycans. The large hydration shell formed by polySia
markedly increases the hydrodynamic volume of its protein carrier and
interferes with NCAM's natural cell–cell adhesion function. PolySia thus
converts an adhesive protein into a repelling one. During brain development, a
high level of polySia ensures that neural precursors can migrate to their
final anatomical sites. Once a destination is reached, polySia is down-
regulated and firm adhesion proceeds, keeping the cells in place. When the
sialyltransferases responsible for polySia formation are genetically ablated
in mice, some nerve progenitor cells adhere prematurely, become stuck in place
and fail to reach their proper destination. Of interest, human genetic and
molecular evidence indicates that variations in polysialylation may be a
factor in human neurological diseases like schizophrenia.

PolySia is found less abundantly on a few other proteins, including another
cell adhesion molecule (SynCAM 1), a peptide receptor (neuropilin-2), and on
O-glycans of fish egg glycoproteins. It is also a key component of the
capsular polysaccharides of certain pathogenic bacteria, in which it is called
colominic acid (e.g., from K1 _Escherichia coli_ ). The linkages between Sia
units in polySia chains vary in bacteria, including α2-8, α2-9, and
alternating α2-8/α2-9. The α2-8 polymer in _E. coli_ can also be O-acetylated
at Sia C-7 or C-9. A bacteriophage that attacks polySia-expressing bacteria
produces a highly specific endosialidase that only clips chains that are ≥8
residues long. This enzyme (Endo-N) and its inactivated form (which binds
polySia) are powerful tools to study polySia functions.

Early studies suggested species specificity in the occurrence of specific Sia
types. With analytical improvements, it is evident that Sia variations are
more widely expressed across species but occur at differing levels. Sias
became prominent late in evolution, primarily in the deuterostome lineage
([Chapter 27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)), which comprises vertebrates and some
“higher” invertebrates (such as echinoderms). Indeed, with exceptions, Sias
are not generally reported in plants or invertebrates. This may change as
molecular techniques improve. For example, insects were believed to be free of
Sias until their discovery in cicada Malpighian tubules and Drosophila brains,
and later identification of a single Drosophila gene ( _DsiaT_ ) with sequence
similarities to mammalian sialyltransferases. When _DsiaT_ is inactivated,
flies suffer locomotor abnormalities and defects in neuromuscular junctions.
Although of very low abundance, Sias are both present and crucial to the
survival of Drosophila. [Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/sialicacids/) have also been reported in the nervous systems of
behaviorally complex protostomes like octopus and squid. On the other hand, no
Sias or ST genes were found in the well-studied round worm, _Caenorhabditis
elegans_ ([Chapter 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)). Evidently, Sias were invented
in the common ancestor of protostomes and deuterostomes, and then they became
essential in deuterostomes, but were partially or completely discarded in some
protostome lineages.

Meanwhile, some pathogenic and commensal bacteria express large amounts of
Sias in their capsular polysaccharides and/or lipooligosaccharides, protecting
them from complement activation and/or antibody recognition of the underlying
glycans, also sometimes engaging the Siglec family of receptors ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)) to dampen innate immune cell reactivity.
Essentially, all bacterial enzymes involved in synthesizing and metabolizing
Sias have evolved independently, apparently being “reinvented” from the more
ancient prokaryotic NulO pathway. Yet, other microbes “steal” Sias from their
host using various mechanisms to achieve “molecular mimicry.” _Neisseria
gonorrheae_ even has a remarkably efficient surface ST that can scavenge trace
amounts of CMP-Neu5Ac from body fluids of its exclusive host, humans.

Interestingly, there is wide variation in Sia expression and complexity within
deuterostomes, with the sialome of echinoderms appearing very complex and that
of humans being among the simplest. Although expression of Neu5Gc and
9-O-acetylated Sias is very common in deuterostomes, exceptions exist, such as
lack of Neu5Gc biosynthesis in humans, New World monkeys, Sauropsids (birds
and reptiles, the descendants of dinosaurs), the Pinnipedia and Musteloidia
members of the Carnivora, and likely in the Monotreme lineage.

Although Neu5Gc is common in mammals including human's closest evolutionary
relatives (bonobos and chimpanzees), it is not synthesized by our species,
because of a single-exon deletion mutation in the _CMAH_ gene encoding the
hydroxylase enzyme that converts CMP-Neu5Ac to CMP-Neu5Gc. Why did the human
lineage lose Neu5Gc? Many pathogens depend on Sias to bind and infect
vertebrates ([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)), and some specifically
target Neu5Gc. Taken together, existing data suggest that a potent malaria
organism recognizing Neu5Gc may have been the cause of initial selection of
the CMAH null state. Subsequent natural development of anti-Neu5Gc antibodies
in CMAH-null females may have then reduced fertility with CMAH positive males
by killing their sperm, possibly serving to speciate the null population.
Other lineage-specific losses of Neu5Gc expression mentioned earlier may have
occurred in a similar fashion. This is part of a broader consideration of Sias
as both a pathogen target and a physiological regulator, a combination that
apparently contributed to rapid evolution of both Sia expression patterns and
Sia-binding proteins, especially of the I-type lectin family ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)).

Despite _CMAH_ inactivation in humans, traces of Neu5Gc are found in normal
human tissues. This, as well as the presence of Neu5Gc in human tumor cells
and tissues, represents metabolic incorporation of Neu5Gc ingested from foods,
particularly “red meats.” Most healthy humans have circulating anti-Neu5Gc
antibodies, raising the possibility that their interaction with metabolically
incorporated Neu5Gc contributes to inflammation in diseases that correlate
with red meat consumption, such as atherosclerosis and epithelial cancers,
pathologies uncommon in Neu5Gc-positive primates. Other possible consequences
of human Neu5Gc loss include resistance to some Neu5Gc-binding animal
pathogens such as _E. coli_ K99, and the emergence of Neu5Ac-preferring
exclusive human pathogens such as the malarial parasite _Plasmodium
falciparum_ and the toxin from _Salmonella typhi_.

An unexplained observation is the consistent scarcity of Neu5Gc in the brains
of all vertebrates studied to date, including those that have high Neu5Gc
levels in other tissues. The evolutionary advantage of excluding Neu5Gc from
this vital organ is unknown, but may relate to selection pressure by unknown
pathogens and/or selective roles of Neu5Ac in optimal brain development and
function.

The metabolic pathways of Neu5Ac in vertebrates are shown in [Figure
15.4](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f4/?report=objectonly). Neu5Ac is derived
by condensation of ManNAc-6-P with phosphoenolpyruvate. The ManNAc-6-P is
produced by a bifunctional enzyme, glucosamine UDP-
GlcNAc-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase, coded by the _GNE_ gene. The
enzyme converts UDP-GlcNAc to ManNAc-6-P and UDP in two steps. Missense
mutations in this gene cause hereditary inclusion body myopathy (HIBM) in
humans ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)), and gene inactivation causes
embryonic lethality in mice. Condensation of ManNAc-6-P with
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) yields Neu5Ac-9-P, which is then dephosphorylated by
a specific phosphatase to release free Neu5Ac in the cytoplasm. The same
pathway can use Man-6-P instead of ManNAc-6-P to generate Kdn. In contrast,
Neu5Ac biosynthesis in prokaryotes involves direct condensation of ManNAc with
phosphoenolpyruvate. Notably, synthetic unnatural mannosamine derivatives can
enter the Sia biosynthetic pathway, allowing chemical engineering of modified
cell-surface sialic acids ([Chapter 56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)).

Free Sias are converted to the donor CMP-Sia (as the β-anomer) by condensation
with CTP, a reaction that occurs in the nuclear compartment, for unknown
reasons. The CMP-Sia products then return to the cytosol, whence they are
transported into Golgi compartments by a CMP antiporter, which concentrates
them in the Golgi lumen ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). In contrast,
prokaryotic CMP-Sias are synthesized in the cytoplasm and used without
compartmentalization. In eukaryotes, increasing cytosolic CMP-Sia levels
feedback to inhibit GNE. In a human disease called sialuria different
mutations of _GNE_ result in failed feedback regulation and overproduction of
sialic acid.

The linkage-specific STs mentioned earlier are type II membrane proteins in
animals, with signals leading to their Golgi localization. Animal STs share
similar amino acid sequence motifs (sialylmotifs) that include shared sites
for CMP-Sia recognition ([Chapters 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/) and
[8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)). In contrast, prokaryotic STs emerged independently
by convergent evolution, they do not have sialylmotifs, and some do not even
share homology. In addition to the Sia linkage, several eukaryotic STs show
strong preferences for glycolipids versus glycoproteins and/or the terminal
saccharide and sequence. Modified Sias, such as Neu5Gc, O-acetylated species,
and unnatural synthetic sialic acids can be donors for STs after conversion to
their activated CMP-Sia forms. Some mammalian STs transfer both Neu5Ac and
Kdn, but others transfer only one or the other. All result in α-anomeric
linkages. As mentioned earlier, “ _trans_ -sialidases” of some pathogenic
trypanosome species and some bacteria transfer Sias from one glycosidic
linkage to another ([Chapter 43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)). Although _trans_
-sialidases tend to be specific regarding the glycosidic linkage they
generate, they can be promiscuous with regard to the donor and acceptor
glycans.

Once CMP-Neu5Ac is converted to Neu5Gc in the cytosol, there is no known way
to reverse the reaction, perhaps explaining the accumulation of dietary Neu5Gc
in human tissues. Further chemical diversity in Sias is generated by enzymatic
modification of Neu5Ac, Neu5Gc, and Kdn via reactions that occur mostly in the
lumen of the Golgi and related organelles, and on mature sialoglycoconjugates,
as well as at the CMP-Sia level. Different enzymes likely O-acetylate Sia at
C-7/9 (most common) and C-4 (less common). Multiple O-acetyltransferases (many
likely yet to be discovered) appear to have specificity for Sias of different
glycosidic linkages or carried on different classes of mature glycoconjugates,
or as CMP-Neu5Ac. For example, a human O-acetyltransferase (CASD1) acetylates
CMP-Neu5Ac which is then transferred to proteins, and the _E. coli_ K1 NeuO
enzyme O-acetylates polySia. O-Acetyl groups found at Sia C-9 appear to be
initially added to C-7, followed by nonenzymatic migration to C-9 under
physiological conditions. Other substitutions of the hydroxyl groups arise
from use of appropriate donors ( _S_ -adenosylmethionine for methylated Sias
or 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate for sulfated Sias). With the
exception of Neu5Gc, other modified Sias do not appear to be very effective
substrates for reactivation by CMP-Sia synthases, so their catabolism involves
reversal enzymes like Sia O-acetylesterases.

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) are removed from
glycoconjugates by sialidases, which are also historically called
“neuraminidases.” The term “sialidase” is preferred, although viral sialidases
are still called neuraminidases because of the use of “N” in their strain
designation (e.g., H1N1 influenza), where N1 refers to its
neuraminidase/sialidase. In eukaryotes, sialidases are encoded by _NEU_ genes,
of which there are four in the human genome. Although Neu-1 and Neu-4 are
thought to act primarily intracellularly in endosomal/lysosomal compartments
to recycle sialoglycans, Neu-1 can also be recruited to the cell surface where
it may regulate sialylation and modulate receptor-mediated signaling. In
contrast, Neu-3 appears primarily on the cell-surface and has a preference for
gangliosides, whereas Neu-2 exists in the cytosol, presumably to recycle
sialoglycans that enter that compartment following autophagy or phagocytosis.

Many microorganisms, including many pathogens, express sialidases. Unlike the
case with STs, bacterial, fungal, and invertebrate sialidases are
evolutionarily related to their vertebrate counterparts. In contrast, viral
sialidases that are essential for their virulence represent distinct families.
The 3D structures of pathogen sialidases are a focus for drug development
([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Sialidases vary in their substrate
specificity from highly selective (e.g., the α2-3-specific sialidase from
_Streptococcus pneumoniae_ ) to broadly acting (e.g., the α2-3, α2-6, α2-8
sialidase from _Arthrobacter ureafaciens_ ). Interestingly, some pathogen
sialidases have additional lectin (sugar-binding) domains that appear to
direct the action of the enzymes to particular sites of action.

Some Sia linkages resist release even by sialidases with broad specificity. A
branched α2-3Sia on the brain ganglioside GM2 requires a special helper
protein (GM2-activator) to facilitate its cleavage, and mutation of
GM2-activator protein results in devastating GM2 buildup in the brain
([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). O-Methylation and O-acetylation of Sias
also can hinder or even prevent hydrolysis by sialidases, as is the case for
4-O-acetyl groups. These properties are likely biologically significant, but
have not been well investigated.

Microbial sialidases and _trans-_ sialidases (see also [Chapter
43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)) are powerful virulence factors that may assist
invasion, unmask potential binding sites, modulate the immune system, and, in
addition, provide nutrients for some bacteria. Viral neuraminidases facilitate
release and spreading of newly formed viruses, and specific viral sialidase
inhibitors are widely used as the antiviral drugs Relenza and Tamiflu
([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).

Once a Sia molecule is released in the lysosome of a vertebrate cell, it is
returned to the cytosol by a specific exporter (Sialin), where it is either
reused or degraded. Human mutations in Sialin cause Salla disease and
infantile sialic acid storage disease, resulting in accumulation of Sia in
lysosomes and excretion of excess Sia in the urine. Some pathogens scavenge
Sias from the extracellular space, using high-efficiency transporters to
concentrate them from trace levels. In contrast, there is no evidence for
plasma membrane Sia transporters in eukaryotic cells. Nevertheless, free Sias
can be taken up into mammalian cells via fluid-phase macropinocytosis,
eventually arriving in the lysosomes, from where they are exported into the
cytoplasm by Sialin. Intact sialoglycans can also be taken up and transported
to lysosomes, where sialidases release Sias for delivery to the cytoplasm and
reuse by the cellular CMP-Sia synthase. However, at the whole-body level, free
Sias in the bloodstream derived from cellular sources or digestive processes,
are rapidly excreted in the urine. Thus, uptake of sialoglycoproteins
(followed by lysosomal release by Neu-1 and export by Sialin) may better
account for the incorporation of dietary Neu5Gc in human tissues.

O-Acetylated Sias are de-O-acetylated by Sia-specific O-acetylesterases,
including the human enzyme coded by the _SIAE_ gene, which may regulate B-cell
development and immune tolerance, by modulating recognition by Siglec
receptors ([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). Enzymes with sialic acid
9-O-acetylesterase activity are also found in some bacteria and viruses.
Influenza C virus and some coronavirus hemagglutinins bind specifically to
9-O-acetyl sialic acid for host infection, and their O-acetylesterases help in
their further dissemination after newly budded virions are released from host
cells. Notably, all known O-acetylesterases specific for esters at C-9 are
incapable of releasing O-acetyl esters from C-7. However, 7-O-acetyl groups
can migrate to C-9 under physiological conditions and thus become substrates
for these enzymes. This process can even result in stepwise deesterification
of 7/8/9-tri-acetyl Sias, which do exist in nature. Different vertebrate and
viral esterases are specific for 4-O-acetyl groups, but relatively little is
known about them.

If not reused or excreted, Sias are degraded by a cytosolic Sia-specific
pyruvate lyase (encoded by _NPL_ ) that cleaves the molecule into an _N_
-acyl-mannosamine and pyruvate. Such _N_ -acyl-mannosamines may either reenter
the Sia biosynthetic pathway after phosphorylation by kinases, or be further
metabolized via conversion to _N_ -acyl-glucosamines and their corresponding
phosphates, with eventual deacylation, ([Figure
15.4](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f4/?report=objectonly)). Sia-specific
pyruvate lyases also exist in various microorganisms, allowing the use of host
Sias as a nutrient source.

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) are amenable to
analysis as components of isolated glycans, as released monosaccharides, and
also in situ on cell surfaces. Among animal monosaccharides, Sias have a
distinct molecular mass that makes them readily identifiable by mass
spectrometry ([MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/)),
currently among the most sensitive methods for glycan analysis ([Chapters
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/) and [51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)). The glycerol-like
side chain of Sias (C-7, C-8, and C-9) is uniquely sensitive to periodate
oxidation under very mild conditions, providing a method to selectively
generate aldehyde groups only on sialoglycans (remarkably, this chemical
reaction can even show this specificity when applied to some intact cell
surfaces). Subsequent addition of a tagged nucleophile (e.g., biotin
hydrazide) results in a tag (e.g., biotin) covalently bound to every Sia that
was originally cleaved by periodate. Selective release of most Sias from
intact cells or isolated sialoglycans is accomplished using microbial
sialidases. Use of α2-3 or α2-8-specific sialidases can provide some insight
on Sia linkages as well. Sia glycosides are also more susceptible to acid
hydrolysis than most other sugars, being released using 0.1 m HCl, or even
with weak acids like 2 m acetic acid or propionic acid at 80°C (albeit still
with some loss or migration of labile modifications). This allows selective
release of Sias from complex glycans for subsequent analysis by
chromatographic methods. Free Sias react with
1,2-diamino-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene (DMB) to generate fluorescent compounds
amenable to qualitative and quantitative high-pressure liquid chromatography.
There are still some major limitations to methods available for Sia analysis.
For example, some mass spectrometric methods result in selective loss of Sias
before mass detection. Some Sia linkages are partly or completely resistant to
sialidases and some are even relatively resistant to acid release. In terms of
identifying Sia modifications, the most accurate analysis requires complete
release and purification with the modifications intact. The stability of each
modification to analytical conditions must be considered—for example, O-acetyl
groups are labile to common methods that use alkaline conditions
(permethylation and beta-elimination).

Sialic acid–binding lectins are also useful for detecting sialoglycans and
their linkages in situ and on isolated sialoglycans. _Sambucus nigra_
(elderberry) lectin binds selectively to α2-6 linked Sias and _Maackia
amurensis_ lectins bind selectively to α2-3 linked Sias. Because plants do not
express Sias, these lectins may deter animal ingestion. Alternatively, the
natural ligands of these lectins may not be sialic acids. Improved probes are
now being developed, taking advantage of the fact that many microbes have
spent millions of years optimizing their binding to vertebrate sialomes (e.g.,
the B subunits of various toxins). An interesting tool for detecting a
specific Sia modification is the hemagglutinin of influenza C or bovine
coronavirus, which binds specifically to 9-O-acetyl Sias on isolated
sialoglycans, cells, and tissues, if its esterase function is inactivated.

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) are endowed with a
rich diversity of chemical modalities within a single monosaccharide, which
evolution uses to modulate the biophysical environment, to mask underlying
glycans, and for specific recognition by complementary Sia-binding proteins
that mediate biological processes. These functions are not mutually
exclusive—for example, highly sialylated molecules with major biophysical
roles (such as mucins) may also express specific sialoglycans that serve as
ligands in recognition processes. For simplicity, different roles of Sia are
addressed separately below.

Mucins are heavily glycosylated O-GalNAc-modified sialoglycoproteins secreted
or membrane-bound at epithelial surfaces in airways, and the gastrointestinal
and urogenital tracts of animals ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). Mucins
can be remarkably large (several in the range of 5 to >20 MDa). Their dense
anionic charge, as well as their propensity to bind water, makes them
efficient as a hydrating and protective barrier at tissue surfaces in contact
with the environment. On mucins, as well as other glycoproteins, closely
spaced O-GalNAc-linked sialoglycans generate extended polypeptide
configurations that would collapse without glycosylation. Clustered
sialoglycans along the polypeptide chain can also protect the underlying
protein from proteases. Membrane-bound sialoglycans (glycoproteins and
glycolipids), which are often quite dense, provide cell surface anionic charge
that acts as a barrier and regulates cell surface functions. An extreme
example of these biophysical effects is polySia, whose functional impacts are
detailed above.

Given Sia abundance on cell surfaces (see [Figure
15.3](/books/NBK453082/figure/ch15.f3/?report=objectonly)), it is unsurprising
that numerous animal pathogens evolved to target these molecules. Indeed,
highly specific Sia-binding proteins were first discovered on human pathogens
and their toxins. In the search for host cell receptors for influenza virus,
it was discovered that isolated virus cross-linked red blood cells, resulting
in hemagglutination. Over time, the red cells then dispersed and could no
longer be agglutinated by fresh virus. This led to the concept of a viral
“hemagglutinin” (a term still used today in virus typing; e.g., the “H” in
H1N1) that binds to a receptor on the red blood cell, which is also
susceptible to “receptor destroying enzyme” on the virus. The component
released by receptor destroying enzyme was identified as Sia, the
hemagglutinin as a Sia-binding protein, and the receptor-destroying enzyme as
a sialidase (viral neuraminidase, the “N” in H1N1). Interestingly, the Sia
linkage specificity of the hemagglutinin defines host restrictions; with bird
influenza virus preferentially binding to Sias in α2-3 linkage and human virus
to Sias in α2-6 linkage. Scientists monitoring influenza virus outbreaks test
α2-3 versus α2-6 specificity to detect potential emerging human influenza
strains. Molecules designed to block the viral sialidase are useful anti-
influenza drugs ([Chapter 57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)).

Sia-specific binding proteins are widespread in pathogens and include numerous
viral hemagglutinins, bacterial adhesins, bacterial toxins, and parasite-
binding proteins (see [Table
15.1](/books/NBK453082/table/CH15TB1/?report=objectonly) for a few examples).
_Helicobacter pylori_ , which causes stomach ulcers and cancers, expresses a
Sia-specific adhesin, SabA, which contributes to chronic colonization of the
stomach lining. The merozoite stage of the malarial parasite _P. falciparum_
can bind to erythrocyte sialoglycans to initiate cell entry. Several bacterial
toxins also target sialoglycans. Cholera toxin and the structurally related
_E. coli_ heat-labile enterotoxin both bind to Sias on ganglioside GM1 on the
intestinal epithelium, whereas tetanus and related botulinum toxins bind to
more complex gangliosides ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). The toxin
from the human pathogen _S. typhi_ binds specifically to Neu5Ac on glycans but
not Neu5Gc, influenza type C expresses a hemagglutinin that binds only to
9-O-acetylated Sias. The complexities of Sia diversification are thought to be
the outcome of an ongoing evolutionary “arms race” between animals and
microbial pathogens ([Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)). In this regard, it
is notable that O-acetyl and N-glycolyl groups on Sias can limit action of
bacterial sialidases and block the binding of some pathogens. Alternately, the
same modifications may facilitate binding of pathogens that have adapted to
them. Sialoglycans at environmental surfaces (like mucins) or free in
biological fluids might provide protection by virtue of their “decoy”
inhibition of microbial adherence and/or sialidases. The evolutionary
persistence of sialoglycans despite their role in virulent diseases suggests
critical physiological roles, some of which are addressed below.

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) in vertebrates can
act as “biological masks,” preventing recognition of underlying glycans
(especially β-linked Gal residues) by intrinsic and extrinsic glycan-binding
proteins. They are also essential components of recognition molecules, with
roles that vary according to cell type, tissue type, and species. The first
mammalian Sia-binding protein found was the complement regulatory molecule
factor H, a soluble serum factor that binds cell-surface Sias and protects
cells from autoimmune attack, providing a recognition of “self.” Its binding
site contains amino acids that engage Sia by complementary charge, hydrogen
bonding, and hydrophobic interactions. Human mutations in the Sia-binding site
amino acids of factor H result in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome in
humans, a disease caused by excessive complement activation, because of the
failure of factor H function. Other variations of factor H increase the risk
of age-dependent macular degeneration, a common cause of blindness resulting
from inflammation in the eye retina.

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) are also involved in
interactions of white blood cells with the endothelial lining of blood
vessels. Circulating neutrophils must bind to and move across the blood vessel
wall to clear bacterial infections in tissues. Endothelial cells respond to
bacterial infection nearby and quickly send Sia-binding lectins to their
surface. E- and P-selectins ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)) connect with
passing neutrophils, which have the complementary sialoglycans on their
surface lipids or proteins. Initially rolling, and finally snagged,
neutrophils then respond to other signals (including cytokines presented by
GAGs, [Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) and work their way into the tissue
to fight bacteria. Without Sia-dependent binding by E- and P-selectins,
inflammation is compromised and persistent tissue infections ensue. A related
lectin, L-selectin, is also involved in trafficking of lymphocytes from blood
to lymph.

[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) (Sia-binding immunoglobulin-
like lectins) constitute a Sia-binding family within the [I-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/itypelectins/) ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). In humans, there are 15 Siglecs, all but one of
which is found on the surface of different blood cell types. In several cases,
binding of Siglecs to their sialoglycan targets on other cells or their own
cell surface modulates ongoing immune responses, either damping them to
protect from hyperimmune reactions or activating them. The one Siglec not
found in the immune system, Siglec-4 (myelin-associated glycoprotein), is in
the nervous system, where it aids cell–cell interactions between nerve cells
and myelin, the protective and insulating membrane sheath essential to rapid
nerve conduction.

Notably, all the above examples of vertebrate Sia-recognizing proteins were
discovered serendipitously, via the unexpected abrogating effect of sialidases
on a biological process. To date, there has been no systematic effort to
search for other examples, but other likely vertebrate Sia-binding lectins are
PECAM-1, PILRs, L1-CAM, and as yet unidentified uterine agglutinin.

Some Sia-binding lectins are found in organisms that do not themselves appear
to express Sias (see [Table
15.1](/books/NBK453082/table/CH15TB1/?report=objectonly) for examples). In
these cases, Sia-binding may defend against sialylated pathogens, such as the
protein limulin in the hemolymph (blood-like fluid) of the horseshoe crab,
which can trigger foreign cell lysis. Sia-binding lectins in plants, such as
elderberry shrubs, may suppress consumption by animals. Of course, some of
these Sia-binding properties might be serendipitous, with the true lectin
ligands being related to prokaryotic NulOs such as Leg or Pse, and/or Kdo,
which is also found in some plants.

Although cell lines deficient in Sias grow in culture, disruption of Sia
synthesis in mice results in lethality at embryonic day 8.5, with poor
differentiation of nerve cells as well as cardiac and skeletal muscle cells.
In contrast, disruption of some ST genes in mice is relatively well tolerated,
in some cases because of complementarity among related genes. For example,
both _St8sia2_ and _St8sia4_ must be deleted in mice to fully eliminate
polySia, resulting in severe developmental deficits in the brain. Likewise,
both _St3sia2_ and _St3sia3_ must be deleted to fully block terminal
sialylation of brain gangliosides, resulting in early motor and behavioral
deficits. Deleting both _St3gal4_ and _St3gal6_ , but not either one
separately, results in loss of leukocyte rolling on selectins. One benefit of
having multiple genes and enzymes that make a Sia linkage is that the results
of single gene mutations are tempered. In contrast, human mutations in
_ST3GAL5_ alone result in severe early seizures with profound deficits in
postnatal cognitive and motor development in humans, mutations in the
_ST3GAL3_ gene result in intellectual impairment, and mutation of human
_ST8SIA2_ is associated with mental illness. Mutations of other STs in mice
cause defects in immune system development and function and/or fertility. As
mentioned earlier, disruption of the single ST in Drosophila results in severe
phenotypes.

Cell and environmental regulation of Sia fine-structure imply roles for Sia
modifications. Certain classes of lymphocytes have O-acetylated Sias, and
mutations in a sialic acid esterase may result in altered immune function.
Expression of polySia and O-acetylation of brain gangliosides varies with
developmental stage and location. Differences in O-acetylation of brain
gangliosides are reported between cold- and warm-blooded species, and between
awake and hibernating animals. Developmental regulation of Neu5Gc expression
and O-acetylation expression in the gut mucosa occurs in response to microbial
colonization and has been suggested to protect against microorganisms.
Similarly, although adult bovine submandibular glands produce large amounts of
highly O-acetylated mucins, this modification is scarcely expressed in the
corresponding fetal tissue. The type and linkages of endothelial, plasma
protein, and erythrocyte Sias can undergo marked changes in responses to
inflammatory stimuli. Abnormalities have also been reported in mice depleted
in 9-O-acetyl Sias (transgenic for a viral 9-O-acetylesterase). The
physiological roles of these Sia modifications are not well established, and
there is much yet to be learned.

Certain changes in Sias are also characteristic of cancer. In general, total
Sia increases and there are quantitative changes in linkages, with
α2-6Gal(NAc) linkages becoming particularly prominent. O-Acetylation of Sia at
C-9 can disappear (colon carcinomas) or become prominent (9- _O_ -acetyl-GD3
in melanomas and basal cell carcinomas). Increased expression of polySia may
also facilitate cell migration by some cancers. The precise mechanisms by
which Sia changes enhance tumorigenesis and/or invasive behavior remain
uncertain, although it has been proposed that tumor sialoglycans enhance
metastatic dissemination by their ability to alter functions of galectins
([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)) and by enhancing binding to endothelial,
leukocyte, and platelet selectins ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).
Increased sialylation may also mask antigenic sites on tumor cells, which also
become more like “self” and evading immune surveillance by engaging factor H
and/or [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/). Regardless of the
mechanisms involved, certain sialylated molecules are also specific markers
for some cancers and potential ligands for targeted therapies ([Chapter
47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)).

Each role of Sias in physiology and pathology provides opportunities for
therapeutic development. Best known are competitive inhibitors of viral
sialidases (Relenza and Tamiflu), which hinder budding and spreading of
susceptible strains of influenza A and B viruses ([Chapters
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/) and [57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). Another strategy
to block Sia-binding pathogens has been to engineer therapeutic sialidases to
remove pathogen-binding sites on human tissues. Efforts to use sialoglycans
themselves as anti-infectives have not been as successful, although sialylated
milk oligosaccharides have been claimed to have some value. Sialic acid
mimetic drugs designed to bind to and block selectins (e.g., Rivipansel) have
shown much promise in human trials as anti-inflammatory drugs. Strategies are
also under study for inducing immune attack of cancer cells with
sialoglycoconjugates and for suppressing antibody responses by engaging
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) on B cells.

Many sialoglycoproteins have been developed as drugs, including erythropoietin
to enhance blood cell production and monoclonal antibodies to target various
diseases including cancers ([Chapter 57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)), and
appropriate sialylation is a desired goal, not only to optimize half-life,
stability, and receptor binding, but also to assure FDA approval. Chemical,
recombinant, and other methods are thus in use to maintain appropriate
sialylation on biological drugs, and efforts are underway to engineer
“humanized” glycosylation (including sialylation) in yeast, insect, or plant
cells (that do not typically express Sia but are more economical sources of
expressed glycoproteins) ([Chapter 56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)). Notably,
differences in sialylation of endogenous and exogenous erythropoietin are used
by the World Anti-Doping Agency to detect illicit administration, and have
resulted in rescinding of many Olympic and Tour de France medals.

The presence of Neu5Gc is of potential importance in biotherapeutics, because
humans have circulating anti-Neu5Gc antibodies, with marked variations in
levels and isotypes. The use of animal-derived proteins in biopharmaceutical
development can lead to Neu5Gc incorporation, with unwanted results.
Similarly, cell therapies under development often use animal sera or support
cells, which can provide Neu5Gc to the cell products. Finally, Neu5Gc on
animal organs likely contributes to the failure of xenotransplantation (use of
animal organs in humans), which led to engineering of _CMAH_ knockout pigs.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Aime Lopez
Aguilar, Kristina Mlinac-Jerković, and Yuki Ohkawa.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.016

Animal cells and some bacteria produce hyaluronan, a high-molecular-weight,
nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan synthesized at the cell surface and extruded
into the extracellular environment. This chapter describes the structure and
metabolism of hyaluronan, its chemical and physical attributes, and its highly
diverse and versatile biological functions.

Sulfated glycosaminoglycans were first isolated in the late 1800s, and the
isolation of hyaluronic acid (now called hyaluronan) followed in the early
1930s. In their classic paper, Karl Meyer and John Palmer named the
“polysaccharide acid of high molecular weight” that they purified from bovine
vitreous humor as “ _hyaluronic acid_ ” (from hyaloid, meaning vitreous), and
they showed that it contained “uronic acid (and) an amino sugar.” It took
almost 20 years to determine the actual structure of the repeating
disaccharide motif (GlcNAcβ4GlcAβ3) of hyaluronan ([Figure
16.1](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f1/?report=objectonly)). In contrast to the
other classes of glycosaminoglycans, hyaluronan is not further modified by
sulfation or by epimerization of the glucuronic acid moiety to iduronic acid.
Thus, the chemical structure shown in [Figure
16.1](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f1/?report=objectonly) is faithfully
reproduced by any cell that synthesizes hyaluronan, including animal cells and
bacteria.

At first glance, the simplicity of hyaluronan might suggest that it arose
early in evolution relative to other glycosaminoglycans. However, this is not
the case, because _Drosophila melanogaster_ and _Caenorhabditis elegans_ do
not contain the necessary synthases for its assembly. Instead, it appears that
hyaluronan arose during the evolution of the notocord shortly before or
concurrent with the advent of cartilage and appendicular skeletons apparently
as a paralog of the more ancient cell-surface enzymes producing other β-linked
polymers like chitin and cellulose. Virtually all cells from vertebrate
species can produce hyaluronan, and its expression correlates with tissue
expansion and cell motility. As discussed below, hyaluronan has essential
roles in development, tissue architecture, cell proliferation, signaling
reactions across the plasma membrane, inflammation, and microbial virulence.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) has an indefinite and
very high degree of polymerization, typically in the range of 104
disaccharides, with an end-to-end length of ∼10 µm (∼1 nm/disaccharide). Thus,
a single molecule of hyaluronan could stretch about halfway around the
circumference of a typical mammalian cell. The carboxyl groups on the
glucuronic acid residues (pKa 4–5) are negatively charged at physiological pH
and ionic strength, making hyaluronan polyanionic. The anionic nature of
hyaluronan together with spatial restrictions around the glycosidic bonds
confer a relatively stiff, random coil structure to individual hyaluronan
molecules in most biological settings. Hyaluronan chains occupy a large
hydrodynamic volume such that in a solution containing 3–5 mg/mL hyaluronan,
individual molecules occupy essentially all of the solvent. This arrangement
creates a size-selective barrier in which small molecules can diffuse freely,
whereas larger molecules are partially or completely excluded. Additionally,
this solution shows high viscosity with viscoelastic properties, conditions
found in the vitreous humor of the human eye and in synovial fluid of joints.
Hyaluronan in synovial fluids of articular joints is essential for
distributing load during joint motion and for protecting the cartilaginous
surfaces. Thus, in both eye and joint tissues, the physical properties of
hyaluronan relate directly to tissue function.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) biosynthesis is
catalyzed by hyaluronan synthases (HASs) ([Figure
16.2](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f2/?report=objectonly)). The first bona
fide HAS gene ( _spHas_ ) was cloned from _Streptococcus_ , and the protein
expressed in _Escherichia coli_ ( _E. coli_ ) was shown to synthesize high-
molecular-weight hyaluronan from the UDP-sugar substrates. The gene shows
homology with a _Xenopus_ gene, _DG42_ (now known as _xlHAS1_ ; [Chapter
27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)). The homology was instrumental in the subsequent
identification of the three members of the mammalian _Has_ gene family,
_Has1–3_. These genes code for homologous proteins predicted to contain five
to six membrane-spanning segments and a central cytoplasmic domain.

As described in [Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/), cells synthesize sulfated
glycosaminoglycans (heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, and keratan sulfate)
on core proteins of proteoglycans as they transit through the Golgi, and
elongation of the chains occurs at their nonreducing ends. In contrast,
hyaluronan synthesis normally occurs at the inner surface of the plasma
membrane in eukaryotic cells and at the cytoplasmic membrane of bacteria that
produce hyaluronan capsules. The synthases use the cytosolic substrates UDP-
glucuronic acid (UDP-GlcA) and UDP- _N_ -acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) and
extrude the growing polymer through the membrane to form extracellular
matrices ([Figure 16.2](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f2/?report=objectonly)).
According to the model, the reducing end of the growing chain would have a UDP
moiety that is displaced when the next nucleotide sugar is added. In keeping
with its evolutionary history, it appears HA synthesis is initiated by
production of a short chain of chitin-like GlcNAcβ4GlcNAc.

In typical cultured mammalian cells, division under conditions of
hyperglycemia (two to three times normal glucose level) results in hyaluronan
synthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi, and transport vesicles.
Under these conditions, the elongating hyaluronan chains are inserted
inappropriately into these compartments, inducing abnormalities in cellular
functions (e.g., kidney nephropathy and proteinurea). The activity of the HAS
enzymes also can be regulated by phosphorylation and the addition of O-GlcNAc
([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) biosynthesis in
bacteria involves the expression of multiple enzymes, usually as an operon.
For example, in _Streptococcus_ , _hasC_ encodes an enzyme that makes UDP-Glc
from UTP and glucose-1-P; _hasB_ encodes the dehydrogenase that converts UDP-
Glc to UDP-GlcA; _hasD_ generates UDP-GlcNAc from glucosamine-1-P, acetyl CoA,
and UTP; and _hasA_ ( _spHas_ ) encodes the hyaluronan synthase. The
_Streptococcus hasA_ gene encodes a bifunctional protein that contains both
transferase activities. Thus, _spHas_ assembles the polysaccharide from the
reducing end. The synthase spans the membrane multiple times, presumably
forming a pore for hyaluronan extrusion during capsule formation. In contrast,
_Pasteurella_ synthesizes hyaluronan by an enzyme that is unrelated to _hasA_
and the mammalian _Has_ gene family. In this case, the enzyme has two
separable domains with independent glycosyltransferase activities—one for UDP-
GlcNAc and the other for UDP-GlcA, and the elongation is on the nonreducing
end.

Animal cells express a set of catabolic enzymes that degrade hyaluronan. The
human hyaluronidase gene ( _HYAL_ ) family is complex, with two sets of three
contiguous genes located on two chromosomes, a pattern that suggests two
ancient gene duplications followed by a block duplication. In humans, the
cluster on chromosome 3p21.3 ( _HYAL1_ , _2_ , and _3_ ) appears to have major
roles in somatic tissues. _HYAL4_ in the cluster on chromosome 7q31.3 codes
for a protein that appears to have chondroitinase, but not hyaluronidase,
activity; _PHYAL1_ is a pseudogene; and _SPAM1_ (sperm adhesion molecule 1,
PH-20) is restricted to testes. The role of SPAM1 in fertilization is
discussed below.

The turnover of hyaluronan in most tissues is rapid (e.g., a half-life of ∼1
day in epidermal tissues), but its residence time in some tissues can be quite
long and dependent on location (e.g., in cartilage). It has been estimated
that an adult human contains approximately 15 g of hyaluronan and that about
one-third turns over daily. Turnover appears to occur by receptor-mediated
endocytosis and lysosomal degradation either locally or after transport by
lymph to lymph nodes or by blood to liver. The endothelial cells of the lymph
node and liver sinusoids remove hyaluronan via specific receptors, such as
LYVE-1 (a homolog of CD44) and HARE (hyaluronan receptor for endocytosis).
HARE appears to be the major clearance receptor for hyaluronan delivered
systemically by lymph and blood. The current understanding of this catabolic
process is that hyaluronidases at the cell surface and in the lysosome
cooperate to degrade the chains. Large hyaluronan molecules in the
extracellular space interact with cell-surface receptors that internalize
fragments produced by membrane-associated hyaluronidases, including HYAL2 and
TMEM2. The fragments are transported into a unique vesicular endosomal
compartment and eventually enter a pathway to lysosomes for complete
degradation to monosaccharides, probably involving HYAL1 and the two
exoglycosidases β-glucuronidase and β-N-acetylglucosaminidase. The importance
of this process is demonstrated by the facts that _Hyal2_ -null mice show
lethality at embryonic day 9.5 and Tmem2-deficient mice accumulate hyaluronan
and by the identification of a lysosomal storage disorder in a person with a
mutation in _HYAL1_.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) fragments have been
suggested to act as an endogenous signal of injury, or during infection by
Group A _Streptococcus_ , which contains a hyaluronan capsule. The signaling
activity of HA fragments is mediated through binding of cell-surface
receptors, such as CD44, which in turn modulates response through toll-like
receptors. Signaling through these and other receptors is affected by the size
of the hyaluronan fragments, but the mechanism underlying the dependence of
activity on the size of the fragments remains an area of active research.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) has multiple roles in
early development, tissue organization, and cell proliferation. The _Has2_
-null mouse shows an embryonic lethal phenotype at the time of heart
formation, whereas _Has1_ -, _Has3_ -null, and _Has1/3_ compound mutant mice
show no obvious developmental phenotype. Interestingly, explanted cells from
the _Has2_ -null embryonic heart do not synthesize hyaluronan or undergo
epithelial–mesenchymal transformation and migration unless small amounts of
hyaluronan are added to the culture medium. This finding indicates that the
production of hyaluronan at key points may be essential for many tissue
morphogenetic transformations—in this case, formation of the tricuspid and
mitral valves.

Many of the activities of hyaluronan depend on binding proteins present on the
cell surface and/or secreted into the extracellular matrix. A class of
proteins that bind selectively to hyaluronan was first discovered in
cartilage. This class is now referred to as the link module family of
hyaladherins ([Figure
16.3](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f3/?report=objectonly)). Proteoglycans were
efficiently extracted from this tissue with denaturing solvents and were shown
to reaggregate when restored to renaturing conditions. An essential protein,
referred to as the link protein (HAPLN-1), was shown to be necessary for
stabilizing the proteoglycan aggregates, and subsequently, the structure of
the aggregate was defined ([Figure
16.4](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f4/?report=objectonly)). The link protein
contains two homologous repeats of a sequence motif, now named the link
module. Proteins that have a link module, including link proteins (HAPLN-1
through -4 in humans), several proteoglycans, and other extracellular matrix
proteins, can interact specifically with hyaluronan. The major cartilage
proteoglycan, now named aggrecan ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), also
contains a globular domain, the G1 domain, with two homologous link modules
that interact with hyaluronan. An additional domain in the link protein
(HAPLN-1) cooperatively interacts with a homologous domain in G1, which locks
the proteoglycan on the hyaluronan chain. In the absence of the HAPLN-1,
aggrecan fails to anchor to hyaluronan. Mice deficient in HAPLN-1 show defects
in cartilage development and delayed bone formation (short limbs and
craniofacial anomalies). Most mutant mice die shortly after birth as a result
of respiratory failure, and the few survivors develop progressive skeletal
deformities.

Interestingly, there are four proteoglycan genes with homologous G1 domains
that interact with hyaluronan (versican, neurocan, brevican, and aggrecan)
([Figure 16.3](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f3/?report=objectonly)). Versican
is a major component of many soft tissues and is especially important in
vascular biology. Neurocan and brevican are expressed predominantly in brain
tissue. Versican and aggrecan are anchored to hyaluronan in tissues by similar
link protein-dependent mechanisms, and it is likely that neurocan and brevican
are organized similarly. In the brain, these complexes form perineuronal nets.
Thus, hyaluronan acts as a scaffold on which to build proteoglycan aggregate
structures adapted to diverse tissue functions.

An impressive example of the requirement for a hyaluronan-based matrix occurs
during the process of cumulus oophorus expansion in the mammalian preovulatory
follicle. At the beginning of this process, the oocyte is surrounded by about
1000 cumulus cells tightly compacted and in gap-junction contact with the
oocyte. In response to hormonal stimuli, the cumulus cells up-regulate HAS2
and a link module family hyaladherin encoded by tumor necrosis
factor–stimulated gene 6 ( _TSG-6_ ). The expression of these proteins
initiates production of hyaluronan and its organization into an expanding
matrix around the cumulus cells. Concurrently, the follicle becomes permeable
to serum, which introduces an unusual molecule called inter-α-trypsin
inhibitor (ITI), composed of the trypsin inhibitor bikunin and two heavy
chains all covalently bound to a chondroitin sulfate chain. In a complex
process, TSG-6 catalyzes the transfer of heavy chains that are covalently
linked to chondroitin sulfate (via an ester bond between the carboxy-terminal
aspartate residue of the heavy chains and the C-6 of _N_ -acetylgalactosamine
in chondroitin-4-sulfate) onto the newly synthesized hyaluronan by
transesterification to C6 of an _N_ -acetylglucosamine residue. In the absence
of either TSG-6 or ITI, the matrix does not form, and the phenotype of mice
null for either of these molecules is female infertility. At the time of
ovulation, hyaluronan synthesis ceases, and ovulation of the expanded cumulus
cell–oocyte complex occurs. Before fertilization, individual sperm undergo
capacitation enabling them to penetrate and fertilize an ovum. During this
process, SPAM1/PH20, a GPI-anchored hyaluronidase, redistributes and
accumulates in the sperm head. SPAM1 binds hyaluronan in the cumulus, causing
an increase in Ca++ flux and sperm motility. It also helps dissolve the
cumulus matrix as the sperm moves through the hyaluronan vestment. A soluble
form of SPAM1 is secreted during the acrosome reaction. The release of
acrosomal hyaluronidase and proteases renders the sperm capable of fusing with
the egg and eventually destroys the entire matrix to allow the fertilized
oocyte to implant and develop.

There are several hyaluronan-binding proteins with homologous link modules
([Figure 16.3](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f3/?report=objectonly)). The four
homologous link proteins belong to a subfamily called the “hyaluronan and
proteoglycan link proteins” (HAPLNs); these are expressed in many tissues.
Four cell-surface receptors have extracellular domains with one link module:
CD44, LYVE-1 (lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor),
HARE/STABILIN-2 (hepatic hyaluronan clearance receptor), and STABILIN-1, which
are expressed on discontinuous endothelial cells and some activated
macrophages. Other hyaluronan-binding proteins are secreted and include the
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans that comprise the aggrecan superfamily
(aggrecan, versican, brevican, and neurocan) and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-α-stimulated gene 6 (TSG-6), which has one link module.

The three-dimensional structure of the link module fold in TSG-6 has been
determined by nuclear magnetic resonance and defines a consensus fold of the
two α-helices and two triple-stranded antiparallel β-sheets ([Figure
16.5](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f5/?report=objectonly)). The fold consists
of about 100 amino acids and contains four cysteines disulfide-bonded in the
pattern Cys1-Cys4 and Cys2-Cys3. This fold has only been found in vertebrates,
consistent with the fact that hyaluronan is a relatively recent evolutionary
invention. The link module fold is related to that found in the C-type
lectins, but it lacks the Ca++ binding motif ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). In the case of TSG-6, the interaction of
hyaluronan with the protein involves (1) ionic interactions between positively
charged amino acid residues and the carboxyl groups of the uronic acids, and
(2) hydrophobic interactions between the acetamido side chains of two _N_
-acetylglucosamine residues and hydrophobic pockets on either side of adjacent
tyrosines ([Figure 16.5](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f5/?report=objectonly)).
Many of these features are conserved in other members of the hyaluronan-
binding proteins. Subgroups, however, differ in the preferred size and length
of hyaluronan for binding (e.g., hexasaccharides to decasaccharides).

Some hyaluronan-binding proteins do not contain a link module (RHAMM, ITI,
SPACR, SPACRCAN, CD38, CDC37, HABP1/P-32, Siglec-9, and IHABP4), and most of
these are unrelated to one another by primary sequence. Some of these proteins
contain clusters of basic amino acids, referred to as BX7B motifs (where B is
either lysine or arginine and X can be any amino acid other than acidic
residues), but the actual hyaluronan docking site of the chain with this motif
has not been established. Thus, the presence of the BX7B motif should not be
taken as proof that the protein interacts with hyaluronan.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) expression has long
been implicated in enhanced cell adhesion and locomotion because it is
expressed abundantly during morphogenesis and in both physiological and
pathological invasive processes. A search for cell-surface receptors revealed
two major hyaluronan-binding proteins: CD44 and RHAMM (receptor for
hyaluronan-mediated motility). CD44 is a transmembrane receptor expressed by
many cell types, and it varies markedly in glycosylation, oligomerization, and
protein sequence because of differential messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing. CD44H
(the isoform expressed by hematopoietic cells) binds to hyaluronan, and the
interaction can mediate leukocyte rolling and extravasation in some tissues.
Changes in CD44 expression, notably expression of CD44 variants, are
associated with a wide variety of tumors and the metastatic spread of cancer.
Many cells also express the receptor RHAMM, which is involved in cell motility
and cell transformation. The RHAMM pathway is thought to induce focal
adhesions to signal the cytoskeletal changes required for elevated cell
motility seen in tumor progression, invasion, and metastasis. Like CD44, RHAMM
splice variants exist, some of which may be intracellular.

CD44 contains a cytoplasmic domain, a transmembrane segment, and an ectodomain
with a single link module that can bind hyaluronan. When hyaluronan binds to
CD44, the cytoplasmic tail can interact with regulatory and adaptor molecules,
such as SRC kinases, RHO (ras homolog) GTPases, VAV2 (a human proto-oncogene),
GAB1 (a GRB2-associated binding protein), and ankyrin and ezrin (which
regulate cytoskeletal assembly/disassembly and cell migration).
[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) binding to RHAMM also
transduces signals that influence growth and motility, for example, by
activating SRC, FAK (focal adhesion kinase), ERK (extracellular mitogen-
regulated protein kinase), and PKC (protein tyrosine kinase C) ([Chapter
40](/books/n/glyco3/ch40/)).

Interaction of hyaluronan with CD44 can also regulate ERBB-family (epithelial
growth factor receptor) signaling, thereby activating the PI3K
(phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase)–PKB/AKT (protein kinase B) signaling pathway
and phosphorylation of FAK and BAD (BCL2-antagonist of cell death), which
promote cell survival. RHAMM can interact with and activate ERK1, which can
also phosphorylate BAD. Thus, both CD44 and RHAMM interactions with hyaluronan
can influence cell survival. These pathways are relevant to tumor cell
survival and invasion; their inhibition by hyaluronan oligomers and soluble
hyaluronan-binding proteins suggests novel therapeutic approaches for treating
cancer ([Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)).

Some pathogenic bacteria (e.g., certain strains of _Streptococcus_ and
_Pasteurella_ ) produce hyaluronan and deposit it as an extracellular capsule
([Figure 16.6](/books/NBK453025/figure/ch16.f6/?report=objectonly); also see
[Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). Capsular hyaluronan, like other capsular
polysaccharides, increases virulence by helping to shield the microbe from
host defenses. For example, the capsule blocks phagocytosis and protects
against complement-mediated killing. Because bacterial hyaluronan is identical
in structure to host hyaluronan, the capsule can also prevent the formation of
protective antibodies. Thus, the formation of hyaluronan capsules by bacteria
is a form of molecular mimicry. The capsule also can aid in bacterial adhesion
to host tissue, facilitating colonization ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Finally, the production of hyaluronan by invading
bacteria can also induce a number of signaling events through hyaluronan-
binding proteins that modulate the host physiology (i.e., cytokine production
[[Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)]).

In addition to bacteria, an algal virus ( _Chlorella_ ) encodes a hyaluronan
synthase. The functional significance of viral hyaluronan production is
unknown, but could be related to prevention of secondary viral infection,
increase in host capacity to produce virus, or viral burst size. The origin of
viral HAS is unknown, but based on sequence homology it most likely arose from
a vertebrate.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) has been used
therapeutically for a number of years. Patients with osteoarthritis obtain
short-term relief by direct injection of high-molecular-weight hyaluronan into
the synovial space of an affected joint. The mechanism of action is complex
and probably involves both the viscoelastic properties of the polymer as well
as effects on the growth of synovial cells in the joint capsule. Hyaluronan
suppresses cartilage degeneration, acts as a lubricant (thereby protecting the
surface of articular cartilage), and reduces pain perception.

The application of hyaluronan in ophthalmology is widespread. During surgery
for lens replacement due to cataracts, a high potential for injury of fragile
intraocular tissues exists, especially for the endothelial layer of the
cornea. High-molecular-weight hyaluronan is injected to maintain operative
space and structure and to protect the endothelial layer from physical damage.
[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) also has been approved
for cosmetic use (e.g., by subdermal injection to fill wrinkles or pockets
under the skin).

The fact that the small organic molecule 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) acts as
a sink for consumption of UDP-GlcA has been taken advantage of to reduce HA
synthesis. A low-dose formulation of 4-MU is already clinically approved for
treatment of biliary dyskinesia, presumably by altering the glucuronidation of
bile acids. However, depletion of UDP-GlcA could affect many other biochemical
pathways, and these high levels of 4-MU could well have other effects.

Low-molecular-weight hyaluronan oligosaccharides (∼103–104 Da) also have
potent biological activities by altering selective signaling pathways. In
cancer cells, hyaluronan oligosaccharides induce apoptosis and inhibit tumor
growth in vivo. Thus, short hyaluronan chains may prove useful for preventing
cancer metastasis by boosting certain immune responses or altering new blood
vessel growth. Recently, recombinant forms of the _Pasteurella_ synthase
(pmHas) have been engineered to produce hyaluronan oligosaccharides of defined
size. This strategy has great promise for exploring the relationship of
hyaluronan size to function, which may in turn yield new therapeutic agents
with selective activities.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Nicholas Keul,
Sumit Rai, Kristin Stanford, and Kekoa Taparra.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.017

This chapter focuses on the structure, biosynthesis, and general biology of
proteoglycans. Topics include a description of the major families of
proteoglycans, their characteristic polysaccharide chains
(glycosaminoglycans), biosynthetic pathways, and general concepts about
proteoglycan function. Proteoglycans, like other glycoconjugates, have many
essential roles in biology.

The study of proteoglycans dates back to the beginning of the 20th century
with investigations of “chondromucoid” from cartilage and anticoagulant
preparations from liver (heparin). From 1930 to 1960, great strides were made
in analyzing the chemistry of the polysaccharides of these preparations (also
known as “mucopolysaccharides”), yielding the structure of hyaluronan
([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)), dermatan sulfate (DS), keratan sulfate
(KS), different isomeric forms of chondroitin sulfate (CS), heparin, and
heparan sulfate (HS). Together, these polysaccharides came to be known as
glycosaminoglycans (sometimes abbreviated as GAGs) to indicate the presence of
amino sugars and other sugars in a polymeric form. Subsequent studies provided
insights into the linkage of the chains to core proteins. These structural
studies paved the way for biosynthetic studies.

The 1970s marked a turning point in the field, when improved isolation and
chromatographic procedures were developed for the purification and analysis of
tissue proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans. Density-gradient
ultracentrifugation allowed separation of the large aggregating proteoglycans
from cartilage, revealing a complex of proteoglycan, hyaluronan, and link
protein. Also during this period, it was realized that the production of
proteoglycans was a general property of animal cells and that proteoglycans
and glycosaminoglycans were present on the cell surface, inside the cell, and
in the extracellular matrix (ECM). This observation led to a rapid expansion
of the field and the eventual appreciation of proteoglycan function in cell
adhesion, signaling, and other biological activities ([Chapter
38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). Today, studies with somatic cell mutants
([Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)) as well as experiments using gene
knockout and silencing techniques in a variety of model organisms, such as
nematode worms ( _Caenorhabditis elegans_ ), fruit flies ( _Drosophila
melanogaster_ ), African clawed frogs ( _Xenopus laevis_ ), zebrafish ( _Danio
rerio_ ), and mice ( _Mus musculus_ ), are aimed at extending our
understanding of the role of proteoglycans in development and physiology
([Chapters 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)–[27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)) and human
diseases ([Chapters 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)–[47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)).
The application of a variety of newly developed analytical tools, including
mass spectrometry ([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)) and glycan arrays
([Chapter 48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)), are leading to a better understanding
of proteoglycan structure and function.

Proteoglycans consist of a core protein and one or more covalently attached
glycosaminoglycan chains ([Figure
17.1](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f1/?report=objectonly)).
[Glycosaminoglycans](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosaminoglycans/) are
linear polysaccharides, whose disaccharide building blocks consist of an amino
sugar (glucosamine that is N-acetylated or N-sulfated or _N_
-acetylgalactosamine) and a uronic acid (glucuronic acid or iduronic acid) or
galactose. [Figure 17.2](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f2/?report=objectonly)
depicts short segments of glycosaminoglycans and their characteristic
features. [Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) does not
occur covalently linked to proteoglycans but instead interacts noncovalently
with some proteoglycans via hyaluronan-binding motifs ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). Generally, invertebrates produce the same types
of glycosaminoglycans as vertebrates, except that hyaluronan is not present
and the chondroitin chains tend to be nonsulfated. Most proteoglycans also
contain N- and O-glycans typically found on glycoproteins (see [Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and [10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). The
glycosaminoglycan chains are much larger than these other types of glycans
(e.g., a 20-kDa glycosaminoglycan chain contains approximately 80 sugar
residues, whereas a typical biantennary N-glycan contains 10 to 12 residues).
[Keratan sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/keratansulfate/) is a sulfated
poly-[ _N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) chain present on a limited number of proteins as an
N-linked or O-linked chain. The composition of the glycosaminoglycan chains,
the structure of the protein cores, and the distribution of the proteoglycan
all determine the biological activities associated with proteoglycans.

Virtually all mammalian cells produce proteoglycans and secrete them into the
ECM, insert them into the plasma membrane, or store them in secretory
granules. The ECM, an essential component of all multicellular animals,
determines the physical characteristics of tissues and many of the biological
properties of the cells embedded in it. The major components of the ECM are
fibrillar proteins that provide tensile strength and elasticity (e.g., various
collagens and elastins), adhesive glycoproteins (e.g., fibronectin, laminins,
and tenascins), and proteoglycans that interact with other ECM components to
promote ECM assembly, govern its physical properties, and serve as a reservoir
of biologically active small proteins such as growth factors. A single cell
type can express multiple proteoglycans. Vascular endothelial cells, for
example, synthesize several different cell-surface proteoglycans, secretory
granule proteoglycans, as well as several ECM proteoglycans.

Compared with the hundreds, perhaps thousands, of glycoproteins that carry N-
and O-linked glycans, relatively few proteins have been identified that carry
glycosaminoglycans (approximately 17 with heparan sulfate, approximately 20
with chondroitin/dermatan sulfate, and approximately eight with keratan
sulfate). Nevertheless, tremendous structural variation of proteoglycans
exists due to a number of factors. First, many proteoglycans can be
substituted with one or two types of glycosaminoglycan chains; for example,
glypicans contain heparan sulfate, whereas syndecan-1 contains both heparan
sulfate and chondroitin sulfate chains. Some proteoglycans contain only one
glycosaminoglycan chain (e.g., decorin), whereas others have more than 100
chains (e.g., aggrecan). Another source of variability lies in the
stoichiometry of glycosaminoglycan chain substitution. For example, syndecan-1
has five attachment sites for glycosaminoglycans, but not all of the sites are
used equally. Other proteoglycans can be “part-time”—that is, they may exist
with or without a glycosaminoglycan chain or with only a truncated
oligosaccharide. A given proteoglycan present in different cell types often
shows differences in the number of glycosaminoglycan chains, their lengths,
and the arrangement of sulfated residues along the chains. Thus, a preparation
of any one proteoglycan (defined by its core protein) represents a diverse
population of molecules, each potentially representing a unique structural
entity. These characteristics, typical of all proteoglycans, create enormous
diversity and potential biological variation in activity.

The major classes of proteoglycans can be classified by their distribution,
homologies, and function. [Table
17.1](/books/NBK453033/table/CH17TB1/?report=objectonly) provides an overview
of many of the known proteoglycans.

The aggrecan family of ECM proteoglycans (also known as lecticans) consists of
aggrecan, versican, brevican, and neurocan. In all four members, the protein
moiety contains an amino-terminal domain capable of binding hyaluronan, a
central region that contains covalently bound chondroitin sulfate chains, and
a carboxy-terminal domain containing a C-type lectin domain ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Aggrecan is the best-studied member of this
family, because it represents the major proteoglycan in cartilage where it
forms a stable matrix capable of withstanding compressive forces by water
desorption and resorption. Versican, which is produced predominantly by
connective tissue cells, undergoes alternative splicing events that generate a
family of proteins. Neurocan is expressed in the late embryonic central
nervous system (CNS) and can inhibit neurite outgrowth. Brevican is expressed
in the terminally differentiated CNS, particularly in perineuronal nets.

The small leucine-rich proteoglycans (SLRPs) contain leucine-rich repeats
flanked by cysteines in their central domain. At least nine members of this
family are known and some carry chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, or
keratan sulfate chains. These proteoglycans help to stabilize and organize
collagen fibers but have other roles in innate immunity and regulation of
growth factor signaling.

The SLRPs and aggrecan family of proteoglycans appear to be unique to
vertebrates. _C. elegans_ and _D. melanogaster_ express other proteoglycans,
suggesting that the core proteins have undergone enormous diversification
during evolution, presumably to accommodate different needs of the organism.
In contrast, the biosynthetic machinery has been evolutionarily conserved,
demonstrating conservation of function for the glycosaminoglycan chains.

Basement membranes are highly specialized thin layers of the ECM that lie
flush against epithelial cells and surround muscle and fat cells. Major
components are laminins, nidogens, and collagens, as well as three unrelated
basement membrane proteoglycans, perlecan, agrin, and type XVIII collagen.
These proteoglycans interact with other basement membrane components and cell-
surface adhesion receptors, but may also be important reservoirs of heparan
sulfate–binding growth factors.

The membrane-bound proteoglycans are diverse. The syndecan family consists of
four members, each with a short hydrophobic domain that spans the membrane,
linking the larger extracellular domain containing the glycosaminoglycan
attachment sites to a smaller intracellular cytoplasmic domain. The syndecans
are expressed in a tissue-specific manner and facilitate cellular interactions
with a wide range of extracellular ligands, such as growth factors and matrix
molecules. Because of their membrane-spanning properties, the syndecans can
transmit signals from the extracellular environment to the intracellular
cytoskeleton via their cytoplasmic tails. Syndecans are sensitive to
proteolytic cleavage by matrix metalloproteases, resulting in shedding of the
ectodomains bearing the glycosaminoglycan chains that retain potent biological
activity ([Chapter 38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). _C. elegans_ and _D.
melanogaster_ express only one syndecan ([Chapter 26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)).

Glypicans carry only HS chains, which can bind a wide array of factors
essential for development and morphogenesis. Six glypican family members exist
in mammals, and only two are expressed in _D. melanogaster_ and _C. elegans_.
Each member of the glypican family of cell-surface proteoglycans has a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor attached at the carboxyl terminus, which
embeds them in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane ([Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). The amino-terminal portion of the protein has
multiple cysteine residues and a globular shape that distinguishes the
glypicans from the syndecan ectodomains, which tend to be extended structures
([Figure 17.1](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f1/?report=objectonly)).

A number of other membrane proteoglycans are expressed on the surface of many
different cell types including the widespread CD44, NG2 (also known as CSPG4),
phosphacan (PTPζ), thrombomodulin, and invariant chain of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II system. Serglycin is the major
cytoplasmic secretory granule proteoglycan that is present in endothelial,
endocrine, and hematopoietic cells. Depending on the species, it has a
variable number of glycosaminoglycan attachment sites that can carry
chondroitin sulfate or heparin chains. In fact, many proteoglycans show
variation in the degree of substitution by GAG chains, giving rise in some
cases to so-called “part-time” proteoglycans.

To a large extent, the biological functions of proteoglycans depend on the
interaction of the glycosaminoglycan chains with different protein ligands.
However, the protein core determines when and where expression takes place and
then can interact with other components of the extracellular environment and
the cytoskeleton. [Table
17.2](/books/NBK453033/table/CH17TB2/?report=objectonly) lists examples of
proteins known to interact with glycosaminoglycans. Proteins that bind to the
sulfated glycosaminoglycan chains appear to have evolved by convergent
evolution (i.e., they do not contain a specific fold present in all
glycosaminoglycan-binding proteins, in contrast to other groups of glycan-
binding proteins). These interactions have profound physiological effects and
are discussed further in [Chapter 38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/).

Different subtypes of sulfated glycosaminoglycans are attached to their core
proteins by unique linkages. There are two types of keratan sulfate,
distinguished by the nature of their linkage to protein ([Figure
17.3](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f3/?report=objectonly)). KS I, originally
described in cornea, is found on an N-glycan linked to protein through an
asparagine residue ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). KS II (skeletal
keratan sulfate) is found on an O-glycan core 2 structure and is thus linked
through _N_ -acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to serine or threonine ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). The structural features in control of keratan
sulfate substitution remain unclear, as the underlying poly-[ _N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/) backbone
can be found on many other glycoproteins. Notably, in humans and bovine, the
large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan found in cartilage (aggrecan) contains
a segment of four to 23 hexapeptide repeats (E-E/L-P-F-P-S) where the keratan
sulfate chains are located, whereas aggrecan in rats and other rodents lacks
this motif and does not contain keratan sulfate.

Two classes of glycosaminoglycan chains—chondroitin sulfate/dermatan sulfate
and heparan sulfate/heparin—are linked to serine residues in core proteins by
way of xylose ([Figure
17.4](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f4/?report=objectonly)). Xylosyltransferase
initiates the process using UDP-xylose as donor. Two isoforms of the enzyme
are known in vertebrates (Xylt1 and Xylt2), but only one isozyme exists in _C.
elegans_ and _D. melanogaster_. A glycine residue invariably lies to the
carboxy-terminal side of the serine attachment site, but a perfect consensus
sequence for xylosylation does not exist. At least two acidic amino acid
residues are usually present, and they can be located on one or both sides of
the serine, usually within a few residues. Several proteoglycans contain
clustered glycosaminoglycan attachment sites, raising the possibility that
xylosyltransferase could act in a processive manner. Xylosylation is an
incomplete process in some proteoglycans, which may explain why proteoglycans
with multiple potential attachment sites contain different numbers of chains
in different cells.

After xylose addition, a linkage tetrasaccharide assembles by the transfer of
two galactose residues catalyzed by unique members of the β4 galactosyl-, β3
galactosyl-, and β3 glucuronosyltransferase families of enzymes ([Figure
17.4](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f4/?report=objectonly)). This intermediate
can undergo phosphorylation at the C-2 position of xylose and in the case of
chondroitin sulfate, sulfation of the galactose residues. In general,
phosphorylation and sulfation occur substoichiometrically, but phosphorylation
may be transient. Phosphorylation occurs early in the assembly process and
creates the preferred substrate for B4GALT7; a phosphatase removes the
phosphate at a later stage of biosynthesis. Galactose sulfation is found in
chondroitin sulfate, but its function remains unclear.

The linkage tetrasaccharide lies at a bifurcation in the biosynthetic pathway.
Two types of reactions occur: addition of β4-linked _N_ -acetylgalactosamine
(GalNAc), which initiates chondroitin sulfate assembly, or addition of
α4-linked _N_ -acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), which initiates heparan sulfate
assembly ([Figure 17.4](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f4/?report=objectonly)).
Genetic evidence from studies of _C. elegans_ suggests that GalNAc addition
during chondroitin assembly is mediated by the same enzyme that is involved in
chain polymerization (SQV5), but biochemical evidence suggests that more than
one enzyme may exist in vertebrates. In heparin/heparan sulfate formation, the
addition of the first GlcNAc residue is catalyzed by an enzyme called EXTL3,
which differs from the transferases involved in heparan polymerization (called
EXT1 and EXT2). These enzymes are important control points because they
ultimately regulate the type of glycosaminoglycan chain that will assemble.
Control of the addition of β4GalNAc or α4GlcNAc appears to be manifested at
the level of enzyme recognition of the polypeptide substrate.

[Keratan sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/keratansulfate/) chains contain
a mixture of nonsulfated (Galβ4GlcNAcβ3), monosulfated (Galβ4GlcNAc6Sβ3), and
disulfated (Gal6Sβ4GlcNAc6Sβ3) disaccharide units ([Figure
17.2](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f2/?report=objectonly)). The biosynthesis
of the poly-[ _N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) backbone is described in [Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/). At least two classes of sulfotransferases, one or
more GlcNAc 6-O-sulfotransferases (e.g., Chst6), and one Gal
6-O-sulfotransferase (Chst1) catalyze the sulfation reactions. These enzymes,
like other sulfotransferases, use activated sulfate (PAPS
[3′-phosphoadenyl-5′-phosphosulfate]) as a high-energy donor ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). GlcNAc 6-O-sulfation occurs on the nonreducing
terminal GlcNAc residue, as a prerequisite to further chain elongation,
whereas sulfation of galactose residues takes place on nonreducing terminal
and internal galactose residues, with a preference for galactose units
adjacent to a sulfated GlcNAc. Sulfation of a nonreducing terminal galactose
residue blocks further elongation of the chain, providing a potential
mechanism for controlling chain length. The poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamine
chains of KS I are generally longer than those of KS II and may contain up to
50 disaccharide units (20–25 kDa). The relationship of enzymes involved in KS
I and KS II sulfation is unclear. The chains can be fucosylated and sialylated
as well ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)).

Vertebrate chondroitin sulfate consists of repeating sulfate-substituted
GalNAcβ4GlcAβ3 disaccharide units polymerized into long chains ([Figure
17.2](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f2/?report=objectonly)). In contrast,
invertebrates such as _C. elegans_ and _D. melanogaster_ make either
nonsulfated or low sulfated chains, respectively. The assembly process for the
backbone appears to be highly conserved, based on the presence of homologous
genes for all of the reactions ([Chapters 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/) and
[26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)). As described above, the assembly process is
initiated by the transfer of GalNAcβ3 to the linkage tetrasaccharide ([Figure
17.4](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f4/?report=objectonly)). In both
vertebrates and invertebrates, the polymerization step is catalyzed by one or
more bifunctional enzymes (chondroitin synthases) that have both β3
glucuronosyltransferase and β4 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase activities.
Vertebrates also express homologs that can transfer individual sugars to the
chain. Chondroitin polymerization also requires the action of the chondroitin
polymerizing factor (Chpf), a protein that lacks independent activity but
collaborates with the polymerases to enhance the formation of polymers.
Sulfation of chondroitin in vertebrates is a complex process, with multiple
sulfotransferases involved in 4-O-sulfation and 6-O-sulfation of GalNAc
residues ([Figure 17.5](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f5/?report=objectonly)).

Additional enzymes exist for epimerization of glucuronic acid (GlcA) to
iduronic acid (IdoA) in dermatan sulfate (Dse1-2), sulfation at the
C-2-position of the uronic acids, and other patterns of sulfation found in
unusual species of chondroitin ([Table
17.3](/books/NBK453033/table/CH17TB3/?report=objectonly)). The location of
sulfate groups is easily assessed using bacterial chondroitinases (ABC, B, and
ACII) that cleave the chains into disaccharides. Many chains are hybrid
structures containing more than one type of chondroitin disaccharide unit. For
example, dermatan sulfate is defined as having one or more IdoA-containing
disaccharide units (chondroitin sulfate B) as well as GlcA-containing
disaccharides (chondroitin sulfate A and C). Animal cells also degrade
chondroitin sulfate in lysosomes using a series of exolytic activities
([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)).

Heparan sulfate assembles as a copolymer of GlcNAcα4GlcAβ4 ([Figure
17.5](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f5/?report=objectonly)), which then
undergoes extensive modification reactions, catalyzed by at least four
families of sulfotransferases and one epimerase. N-acetylglucosamine
N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferases (Ndst1-4) act on a subset of GlcNAc residues
to generate N-sulfated glucosamine (GlcNSO3) units, many of which occur in
clusters along the chain. Generally, the enzyme deacetylates GlcNAc and
rapidly adds sulfate to the free amino group to form GlcNSO3, but a small
number of glucosamine residues with unsubstituted amino groups may arise from
incomplete N-sulfation. An epimerase (Glce), different from the one involved
in dermatan sulfate synthesis, then acts on some GlcA residues, followed by
2-O-sulfation of some of the IdoA units (catalyzed by Hs2st). Some glucuronic
units also undergo 2-O-sulfation by the same enzyme. The addition of
2-O-sulfate groups to GlcA or IdoA blocks the epimerization reaction. Next,
6-O-sulfotransferases (Hs6st1-3) add sulfate groups to selected glucosamine
residues. Finally, certain subsequences of sulfated sugar residues and uronic
acid epimers provide targets for 3-O _-_ sulfotransferases (Hs3st1-6).

In contrast to chondroitin chains, which tend to have long tracts of fully
modified disaccharides, the modification reactions in heparan sulfate
biosynthesis occur in clusters along the chain, with regions devoid of sulfate
separating the modified tracts. In general, the reactions proceed in the order
indicated, but they often fail to go to completion, resulting in tremendous
chemical heterogeneity. The disaccharide composition of the chains can be
readily assessed using bacterial heparin lyases or chemical degradation
methods (which are more useful for differentiating GlcA/IdoA) but direct
sequencing of the chains has proven difficult because of their heterogeneity.
New mass spectrometry methods are making significant inroads into sequencing
of glycosaminoglycans ([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)).

The specific arrangement of sulfated residues and uronic acid epimers in
heparin/heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate gives rise to binding sequences
for ligands. The three examples shown in [Figure
17.5](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f5/?report=objectonly) show minimal
sequences that can interact with fibroblast growth factors (FGFs),
antithrombin, and heparin cofactor II. More modified sequences can interact as
well, and the binding of most FGFs is actually more sensitive to overall
sulfation than to the specific position of the sulfate groups. Binding of
glycosaminoglycans to proteins is described in greater detail in [Chapter
38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/). A major question remains regarding how the enzymes
and biosynthetic pathways are regulated to achieve tissue-specific expression
of ligand-binding sequences.

During the last decade, most if not all of the enzymes involved in
glycosaminoglycan synthesis have been purified and molecularly cloned from
mammals and model organisms. Several important features have emerged from
these studies, which may shed light on how different protein-binding sequences
arise.

  * Several of the enzymes appear to have dual catalytic activities. Thus, a single protein bearing two catalytic domains catalyzes N-deacetylation of GlcNAc residues and subsequent N-sulfation (Ndsts) in heparan sulfate formation. The same is true of the copolymerases, which transfer GlcNAc and GlcA (heparan sulfate) and GalNAc and GlcA (chondroitin sulfate) from the corresponding UDP sugars to the growing polymer. In contrast, the epimerases and O-sulfotransferase activities appear to be unique properties of independent enzymes.

  * In several cases, multiple isozymes exist that can catalyze either a single or a pair of reactions. Thus, four N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferases, three 6-O-sulfotransferases, and seven 3-O-sulfotransferases have been identified in heparan sulfate biosynthesis. Their tissue distribution varies and differences exist in substrate preference, which may cause differences in the pattern of sulfation. However, some overlap in expression and in substrate utilization occurs as well. Multiple isozymes of 4-O- and 6-O-sulfotransferases also can participate in chondroitin sulfate formation.

  * The polymerization and polymer modification reactions probably colocalize in the same stacks of the Golgi complex. Thus, the enzymes may form supramolecular complexes that coordinate these reactions. The composition of these complexes may play a part in regulating the fine structure of the chains.

  * In general, the composition of heparan sulfate, and likely chondroitin and dermatan sulfate, on a given proteoglycan varies more between cell types than that of heparan sulfate on different core proteins expressed in the same cell. This observation suggests that each cell type may express a unique array of enzymes and potential regulatory factors. The mechanisms behind the generation of apparently cell-specific glycosaminoglycan chains through regulated, yet partly stochastic modification reactions remain poorly understood.

  * Recombinant enzymes and new synthetic schemes are increasingly used to generate defined glycosaminoglycan oligosaccharides, which can be used to probe ligand-binding affinities and specificities.

Considerable confusion exists regarding the definition of heparin and heparan
sulfate. [Heparin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/heparin/) is produced by a
limited number of cells, notably connective tissue-type mast cells and
bipotential glial progenitor cells, whereas heparan sulfate is made by
virtually all types of cells. During biosynthesis, heparin undergoes more
extensive sulfation and uronic acid epimerization, such that >80% of the
GlcNAc residues are N-deacetylated and N-sulfated and >70% of the glucuronic
acids undergo epimerization to IdoA. Heparin derived from porcine entrails and
bovine lung is prepared commercially by selective precipitation and is sold by
pharmaceutical companies as an anticoagulant because of its capacity to bind
to antithrombin ([Chapters 38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/) and
[57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). The active sequence is a pentasaccharide shown
in [Figure 17.5](/books/NBK453033/figure/ch17.f5/?report=objectonly), which is
now sold as a purely synthetic anticoagulant
([Arixtra](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/arixtra/)). Low-molecular-weight
heparins are derived from commercial unfractionated heparin by chemical or
enzymatic cleavage, depending on the brand. Selectively desulfated forms of
heparin are also available commercially, some of which lack anticoagulant
activity, but still retain other potentially useful properties (e.g.,
inhibition of inflammation and cell proliferation, and antimetastatic
activity). Heparan sulfate also can contain anticoagulant activity, but
typical preparations from cells or tissues are much less active than heparin.
Care should be taken in extrapolating data obtained with heparin (e.g.,
binding to heparin-Sepharose) versus binding to heparan sulfate and heparan
sulfate proteoglycans; binding to heparin can occur owing to the high charge
content of the polysaccharide, whereas the same factor might bind to heparan
sulfate with lower affinity or not at all. On the other hand, specific
protein-binding motifs expressed in subspecies of heparan sulfate may occur
also in heparin, although concealed by additional, redundant, sulfate
residues.

Cells secrete matrix proteoglycans directly into the extracellular environment
(e.g., members of the aggrecan family, the basement membrane proteoglycans,
SLRPs, and serglycin). However, others are shed from the cell surface through
proteolytic cleavage of the core protein through matrix metalloproteases
(e.g., the syndecans). Cells also internalize a large fraction of cell-surface
heparan sulfate proteoglycans by endocytosis. These internalized proteoglycans
first encounter proteases and heparanase, an endo-β-glucuronidase, and the
core protein and the heparan sulfate chains are cleaved endolytically. The
resulting smaller heparan sulfate fragments eventually appear in the lysosome
and undergo complete degradation by way of a series of exoglycosidases and
sulfatases ([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). [Chondroitin
sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/chondroitinsulfate/) and dermatan
sulfate proteoglycans follow a similar endocytic route. One of the human
hyaluronidases (Hyal-4) has been found to be involved in endolytic degradation
of chondroitin sulfate.

Cells secrete heparanase as well. Extracellular heparanase can cleave heparan
sulfate chains at restricted sites, resulting in release of growth factors or
chemokines immobilized on heparan sulfate proteoglycans at cell surfaces or in
the ECM. In particular, invading cells secrete heparanase. Thus, heparanase
may act with matrix metalloproteases to remodel the ECM.

A family of plasma membrane endosulfatases (Sulfs) can remove sulfate groups
from internal 6-O-sulfated glucosamine residues in heparan sulfate. This
postassembly processing of the chains at the cell surface results in altered
response of cells to growth factors and morphogens. The mammalian genome
contains other sulfatases of unknown function, raising the possibility that
other postassembly processing reactions of glycosaminoglycans may occur.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Andreas Geissner,
Marissa Martinez, and Yuko Naito-Matsui.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.018

Although glycoconjugates predominate at the cell surface, in cellular
secretions, and in the extracellular matrix, within the secretory pathway and
lysosomes, there are also stable residential glycoproteins in the cytoplasm,
nucleus, and plastids of eukaryotes. The prevalence of β-linked O-GlcNAc is so
great in eukaryotes that an entire chapter is devoted to it ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). This review discusses all other forms of
cytoplasmic glycosylation, both established and speculative. The analysis
begins with other well-documented forms of monoglycosylation in prokaryotes,
expands to complex forms in protists, and provides examples of
monoglycosylation exploited by bacterial toxins to co-opt processes vital to
eukaryotes. In addition, conventional N-glycans are reported on a subset of
mitochondrial and chloroplast proteins. Finally, the potential for a more
extensive than currently appreciated occurrence of cytoplasmic glycosylation,
as suggested by many examples of nuclear and cytoplasmic glycoproteins and
glycosaminoglycans, which are yet to be confirmed by modern methods, is
discussed. The numerous types of cytoplasmic and nuclear lectins that have
been described are also reviewed.

The hydroxyl side chains of Thr, Ser, Tyr, hydroxyproline, and hydroxylysine
constitute potential sites of attachment of O-linked glycans, and Asn and Arg
provide attachment sites for N-glycans. Thr, Ser, and Asn are the predominant
linkage residues in the secretory pathway but, interestingly, the best
characterized examples of nucleocytoplasmic O-glycosylation (other than O-β-
GlcNAc; [Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)) occur on Tyr, Hyp (4 _R_ ,2 _S_
-hydroxyproline), and Arg. Also, unlike secretory pathway glycosylation, the
responsible glycosyltransferases often target single proteins. The following
sections review documented examples of nucleocytoplasmic glycosylation in
which the glycosylation reaction occurs in the cytoplasm or nucleus, and the
glycosylated target remains and functions within these compartments. Some of
these examples reside in the cytoplasm alone, whereas others may also occur
within the nucleus. This section also includes examples in which the
cytoplasmic glycosyltransferases derived from a bacterial pathogen are
injected into the eukaryotic host cytoplasm and concludes with a description
of glycosyltransferases that modify DNA. These examples are summarized in
[Table 18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly).

[Glycogen](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycogen/) is a large branched
homopolysaccharide used as a short-term storage form of glucose in bacteria,
yeast, and animals. Glucose is added to and removed from the nonreducing
termini based on availability of the sugar donor UDP-Glc and the nutritional
needs of the cell. Glycogen stores in the liver are also important in
maintaining glucose homeostasis in the blood. Glycogen is assembled initially
from a linear oligoglucoside that is extended by glycogen synthase and
branched by a so-called branching enzyme. Based on the pioneering work of
Whelan and Cohen, the initial oligoglucose is assembled by another enzyme,
glycogenin, which attaches the first sugar to itself in an uncommon Glcα1-Tyr
linkage, at Tyr-195 in human glycogenin-1. Thus, every glycogen molecule,
which can contain up to 105 Glc residues and 12 generations of branch points,
is thought to contain a single glycogenin protein molecule at its nonreducing
end. Thus, glycogen is a glycoprotein whose glycosylation is initiated by
glycogenin, extended by glycogen synthase, and modified by branching enzyme,
debranching enzyme, and glycogen phosphorylase.

The biochemical mechanism of glycogenin glycosylation is interesting because
it naturally assembles as a homodimer under cellular conditions. Evidence
supports the importance of intersubunit-dependent αGlc transfer to the
acceptor hydroxyl on Tyr, and both inter- and intrasubunit extension of
additional αGlc residues to the 4-position of underlying αGlc residues up to a
chain length of ∼10. Production of the glycogenin primer, especially in muscle
cells, can be the rate-limiting step in glycogen formation. Thus, levels of
glycogenin could be capable of overriding the better understood hormonally
controlled mechanisms that involve enzyme phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
and regulate glycogen elongation. There is also crystallographic and
mutational evidence for formation of a complex between glycogenin and glycogen
synthase that is important for glycogen synthase activity in vitro and in
vivo. The physiological impact of this interaction, which is difficult to
reconcile with the idea that there is only one glycogenin per glycogen but
potentially a glycogen synthase for every nonreducing terminus (1012), remains
to be resolved.

[Glycogenin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycogenin/)-like proteins are found
in a wide range of plants, animals, and free-living single-celled eukaryotes.
The _Escherichia coli_ ( _E. coli_ ) homolog is incapable of
autoglucosylation. Glycogenin is a GT-A superfamily member from
[CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) family GT8
([Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes
sequence database) ([Chapter 52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)), which includes
bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) glucosyl and galactosyl transferases and
galactinol synthases—all cytoplasmic as for glycogenin—as well as other
glycosyltransferases in the eukaryotic Golgi. Interestingly, a novel Glc-Arg
linkage has been described in a plant protein potentially associated with the
synthesis of starch, which is related to glycogen, but this protein has no
apparent sequence similarity to glycogenin. The function of this and the
glycogenin-like proteins deserve further investigation for their potential to
mediate other cytoplasmic glycosylation events.

West and colleagues identified a small fucosylated protein, Skp1, in the
cytoplasm of a free-living soil amoeba, the cellular slime mold
_Dictyostelium._ Skp1 is an adaptor in SCF (Skp1/Cullin1/F-box protein)-type
E3-ubiquitin ligase complexes that function in the cytoplasm and nucleus of
all eukaryotes. E3SCF-ubiqutin ligases that mediate the polyubiquitination and
eventual proteasomal degradation of hundreds of proteins involved in cell
cycle regulation, transcription, and signal transduction. Skp1 is subject to
O2-dependent hydroxylation at Pro143, which generates the substrate for five
glycosyltransferase reactions. Based on mass spectrometric, sequential
exoglycosidase treatments and nuclear magnetic resonance
([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) studies
([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)), the glycan is comprised of a
pentasaccharide consisting of a core trisaccharide equivalent to the type 1
blood group H structure, Fucα1-2Galβ1-3GlcNAc1α-, substituted at the
3-position of Fuc by a Galα1,3Galα- disaccharide ([Figure
18.1A](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f1/?report=objectonly)). In an unrelated
protist, the apicomplexan _Toxoplasma gondii_ , a similar core trisaccharide
is capped by a Galα1-Glcα1- disaccharide ([Figure
18.1B](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f1/?report=objectonly)), whose linkages
remain to be determined. The linkage of this glycan to protein, its
localization in the cytoplasm, and the structures themselves are all novel.
Because Pro143 is conserved in the Skp1 genes of plants, invertebrates, and
unicellular eukaryotes, and gene sequences related to those of known Skp1
modification enzymes (see below) are present in the genomes of many protists,
this modification may be widespread, at least in unicellular eukaryotes.

The _Dictyostelium_ glycosyltransferases that glycosylate Skp1 have each been
purified based on their enzymatic activities from cytosolic extracts,
sequenced and cloned, and the enzyme genes were disrupted in _Dictyostelium_
and expressed in _E. coli_. The evidence shows the existence of sequential
linear pathway NDP-sugar-dependent glycosyltransferases that are Golgi-like
except that they are soluble rather than type 2 membrane proteins ([Figures
18.1A,C](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f1/?report=objectonly); [Table
18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly)). The Skp1 GlcNAc-
transferase (EC 2.4.1.229), which adds the first sugar, is related to the
Thr/Ser polypeptide αGalNAc-transferases that initiate mucin-type
O-glycosylation in the Golgi of animals, and therefore forms an anomeric
linkage opposite to that of the well-known O-βGlcNAc transferase ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). However, unlike known polypeptide αGalNAc-
transferases ([Chapters 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/) and
[10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)), the Skp1 GlcNAc-transferase lacks an amino-
terminal signal anchor, consistent with its biochemical fractionation as a
soluble cytoplasmic protein ([Figure
18.1C](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f1/?report=objectonly)). Thus, the
mechanism of initiation of Skp1 glycosylation is similar to that of mucin-type
domains of secretory proteins, except that a different _N_ -acetylhexosamine
(GlcNAc vs. GalNAc) is attached to a distinct hydroxyamino acid (Hyp vs. Thr
or Ser) in the cytoplasm versus the Golgi lumen.

The cloning of the gene for the fucosyltransferase, which adds the third
sugar, led to the discovery that both the second (βGal) and the third (α-L-
Fuc) sugars are added by separate domains of the same soluble protein, PgtA
([Figure 18.1C](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f1/?report=objectonly)). The
β3-galactosyltransferase catalytic domain is most similar to bacterial
lipopolysaccharide and capsular glycosyltransferases, which are also
cytoplasmic, suggesting that cytoplasmic glycosylation in _Dictyostelium_ has
its evolutionary origins in bacterial glycolipid synthesis. The
β-galactosyltransferase catalytic domain belongs to the inverting
[CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) GT2 family, which is diagnostic for
glycosyltransferases with their catalytic domains exposed to the cytoplasm.
However, in bacteria and eukaryotes, these enzyme family members are usually
membrane-associated and their products, including lipopolysaccharides, Dol-P-
sugars, and polysaccharides such as hyaluronic acid, cellulose, and chitin,
are translocated to the lumen or cell exterior. In _Dictyostelium_ , the
fourth and fifth sugars are added by the two-domain glycosyltransferase AgtA,
in which the α3-galactosyltransferase domain is fused to a β-propeller-like
domain, which has a second function that may involve constitutive Skp1
sequestration activity. The catalytic domain is related to a large number of
plant Golgi glycosyltransferases implicated in pectin biosynthesis and here
catalyzes two successive additions. Notably, two glycosyltransferases with
independent evolutionary origins catalyze the completion of Skp1 glycan in
_Toxoplasma_.

_Dictyostelium_ undergoes a developmental program when starved that is
exquisitely sensitive to extracellular conditions including the level of O2,
which is thought to help the cells determine whether they are below or above
ground in their native soil environment. Considerable biochemical, genetic,
and physiological evidence supports the model that at least a component of
O2-dependent development is mediated via the modification of Skp1. Whereas the
rate of Skp1 hydroxylation is O2-limited in vitro and in vivo, glycosylation
is important for maximal interaction with several different F-box protein
subunits of the SCF complex ([Figure
18.1D](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f1/?report=objectonly)). Currently, it is
unclear whether increased association leads to increased turnover of
substrates recognized by the F-box proteins, or reduced levels of F-box
proteins via autoubiquitination. Further studies are needed to determine
whether the glycan functions by reorganizing Skp1 to promote its interaction
with F-box proteins, or contributes directly to binding by a lectin-like
mechanism.

Protein glycosylation is becoming increasingly recognized as a prevalent
modification in bacteria ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). In comparison
to eukaryotes, protein glycosylation appears to vary more extremely among
bacterial species. A recent proteomics search for glycoproteins in the Gram-
positive intestinal bacterium _Lactobacillus plantarum_ , biased only because
potential glycopeptides were affinity enriched with the lectin wheat germ
agglutinin (WGA), identified several glycoproteins with cytoplasmic
localization and functions: the molecular chaperone DnaK, the PdhC E2 subunit
of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the DNA translocase FtsK1, the signal
recognition particle receptor FtsY, FtsZ involved in cell division, and others
of unknown function. Peptides from these proteins were modified with single
HexNAc residues attached to Ser residues. Some of the sites were variably
modified suggesting that they may be regulatory. Nothing is known about the
mechanism of this glycosylation, nor of its function. Interestingly, in _L.
plantarum_ several proteins are glycosylated in the cytoplasm and then
exported to the cell wall. It can be anticipated from this seminal study that
there is much remaining to be discovered regarding glycosylation in
prokaryotic cytoplasms.

An example of a specific function for monoglycosylation comes from the EF-P
protein, the bacterial homolog of eukaryotic elongation initiation factor 5a.
EF-P normally suppresses translational stalling by a mechanism that involves
oxidation of a critical lysyl residue. A very recent phylogenetic analysis of
EF-P sequences revealed a subset of enzymes with an Arg in place of Lys, and a
coevolving gene that was subsequently identified by biochemistry and mass
spectrometry as an argininyl rhamnosyltransferase. Assembly of the Rha-Arg
linkage activates EF-P and is required for pathogenicity of _Pseudomonas,_ a
Gram-negative, opportunistic human pathogen, and a number of other bacteria.
This linkage is, like those described in glycogenin and Skp1, highly novel.
The uniqueness of these linkages perhaps reflects a long evolutionary
separation from the more familiar glycosylation pathways associated with cell
surface and extracellular glycoproteins, and suggests that more novel
mechanisms of glycosylation are yet to be discovered.

Small cytoplasmic G-proteins (GTP-binding proteins) of the Rho family are
involved in regulating the cytoskeleton. Certain toxins from anaerobic
bacteria were found by Aktories and colleagues to contain retaining
glycosyltransferase activities that inhibit G-proteins by attaching a glycosyl
moiety to a threonine residue (Thr-37) in their GTP-binding sites. These
secreted toxins show the remarkable ability of translocating across the
surface membrane into the cytoplasm of mammalian target cells. The
enterotoxins from _Clostridium difficile_ (ToxA) and _Clostridium sordellii_
are α-glucosyltransferases from [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) family GT44 that
use UDP-Glc as the donor. In contrast, a similar toxin from _Clostridium
novyi_ is an O-αGlcNAc transferase that uses UDP-GlcNAc as the donor. The _C.
novyi_ toxin has no primary sequence relationship to the endogenous inverting
animal O-βGlcNAc ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)) or the retaining Skp1
αGlcNAc transferases. A distantly related toxin from _Legionella pneumophila_
, also delivered by a type IV secretion system, installs an αGlc residue on
elongation factor 1A in a broad range of eukaryotic host cells. The target
residue, Ser53, is located in the G domain near the switch-1 region of the
GTPase, and glucosylation inhibits its activity in vitro and in vivo.
Modification appears to depend on a ternary complex of eEF1A, GTP, and an
aminoacyl-tRNA. Interestingly, _Legionella_ encodes yet another toxin with an
unknown specificity that controls vesicular trafficking, so even more remains
to be discovered.

Recently, an unrelated toxin from _Yersinia_ , which enters host cells via a
phage tail-derived translocation system, was found to be an αGlcNAc-
transferase that modifies Tyr-34 of RhoA. Finally, another recent study
described the formation of a GlcNAcα-Arg linkage on death domains in TRADD,
FADD, RIPK1, and TNFR1. This novel reaction is catalyzed by NleB-related
glycosyltransferases from various pathogenic bacteria, apparently promoting
host cell longevity during infection. In contrast to what is known about the
other glycosyltransferase toxins, NleB appears to modify _multiple_ proteins
including glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Although these examples
involve monoglycosylation mediated by exogenous glycosyltransferases (see
[Table 18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly)), their
existence reinforces the potential impact of glycosylation as a regulatory
mechanism, and the diversity of glycosylation events that probably remain to
be discovered.

Although the focus of this chapter is on nuclear and cytoplasmic
glycoproteins, it should be noted that specific bases in DNA have long been
known to be a target of bacteriophage-encoded glycosyltransferases.
Modification of T4-phage DNA hydroxymethylcytosine residues by βGlcTs or
αGlcTs ([Table 18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly))
render them resistant to host restriction enzyme digestion and may have
additional functions as well. Some T-even phages assemble a Glc disaccharide
and others attach different sugars to different bases, and the full diversity
of sugar modifications remains to be described. A related modification also
occurs in a protist, _Trypanosoma brucei_ , in the form of base J. By a
mechanism that resembles the modification of the Skp1 glycoprotein, DNA
thymidine residues are initially hydroxylated by an O2-dependent non-heme
dioxygenase, which generates hydroxymethyl moieties suitable for glycosylation
by a novel, very recently discovered nuclear β-glucosyltransferase. The
enzyme, JGT, is also a [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) GT2 glycosyltransferase
([Table 18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly)). Base J
influences Pol II transcription and termination in these unicellular
eukaryotes. Thus, sugar-based epigenetic modifications occur on DNA, as well
as histones, as seen for O-GlcNAc ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).

The above examples show that nucleocytoplasmic glucosyltransferases (GTs) can
assemble nucleocytoplasmic glycoproteins (or DNA) in both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, as illustrated in [Figure
18.2](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f2/?report=objectonly), but they raise the
important question of prevalence of cytoplasmic glycosylation. The known
examples diverge from traditional glycosylation dogma by their focus on single
protein targets, in contrast to Golgi glycosylation pathways that tend to
modify multiple proteins. Thus, by definition, there will be fewer
glycosylation events from target-restricted pathways.

Yet the literature is replete with many reports suggesting the more widespread
occurrence of cytoplasmic glycoconjugates in animal cells. Many of these
studies have used plant lectins ([Chapter 28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)) and
anticarbohydrate antibodies as tools to detect saccharide-bearing molecules
within the nucleoplasmic or cytoplasmic compartments using immunocytochemical
techniques. These binding studies have largely been ignored by mainstream
biochemists for several reasons.

  1. Most glycosyltransferases involved in complex glycan biosynthesis are type 2 membrane proteins with their active sites within the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi. Thus, the “enzymatic machinery” is on the “wrong” side of the membrane for the biosynthesis of complex nuclear or cytoplasmic glycoconjugates.

  2. Most of the lectin-binding studies that make claims of cytosolic or nuclear glycosylation present no supporting structural data to firmly establish the nature of the putative cytoplasmic or nuclear glycoconjugates.

  3. Plant lectins, such as Concanavalin A, for example, can, under some circumstances, bind to molecules by nonspecific hydrophobic binding that is suppressed by the competing saccharide ligand.

Therefore, although lectins are important tools in glycobiology, conclusions
based on their use—particularly those not compatible with known pathways and
established concepts of biochemistry and cell biology—must be followed up by
rigorous structural analyses. In a recent analysis of yeast extracts, these
criticisms were circumvented by mass spectrometric demonstration of O-Man
glycans on numerous nucleocytoplasmic proteins, which are also abundant on
secretory glycoproteins. In these same types of analyses, O-Man
monosaccharides were not found on mammalian nucleocytoplasmic proteins.
However, confirmation of cytoplasmic and nuclear O-Man in yeast must await
demonstration of the mechanism of the glycosylation reaction and exclusion of
glycosylation reactions occurring during extract preparation. Nevertheless,
these studies suggest that GlcNAc-, Man-, and Fuc-containing glycans are
potentially abundant within the nucleus and cytoplasm, indicating that further
chemical analyses are warranted.

Some studies have examined individual glycoprotein candidates directly. For
example, the α-subunit of the dog kidney sodium pump (Na+, K+-ATPase), a
transmembrane protein, was reported to contain traditional N-linked glycans
(like those formed in the rough endoplasmic reticulum [rER]) with terminal
GlcNAc residues in its cytosolic domain. This conclusion was based on the
enzymatic attachment of radioactive Gal to GlcNAc residues by
galactosyltransferase labeling of permeabilized right-side-out membrane
vesicles. Peptide- _N_ -glycosidase sensitivity of the radiolabeled products
suggested that the acceptors are N-linked glycans ([Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and [50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). This provocative
claim has remained unresolved, because of the lack of site mapping of the
putative cytosolic glycans and the absence of direct structural data.

Several studies have also indicated that the so-called high mobility group
(HMG) proteins, which are important structural components of chromatin, are
bona fide “classical-type” glycoproteins. Purified preparations of HMGs 14 and
17 were found to contain GlcNAc, mannose, galactose, glucose, fucose, and
possibly xylose, and isolated nucleosomes were recognized by a fucose-specific
lectin. Alkali resistance of the saccharides on the HMG proteins is consistent
with attachment of the glycan via an N-linkage. In addition, the presence of
sugars was validated by metabolic radiolabeling with tritiated Fuc, Gal, Man,
or GlcNH2. Later studies suggested that the glycans on HMG 14 and 17 were
required for their binding to nuclear matrix, where the HMG proteins play a
role in modulating chromatin structure at active sites of gene transcription.
Even though these HMG glycosylation studies are widely cited as evidence for
nuclear N-glycans, they lack support from orthogonal structural studies such
as mass spectrometry or [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/). In fact, more recent studies, using modern
methods ([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)), were unable to verify the
presence of complex glycans on the HMG proteins but did report the presence of
O-βGlcNAc ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).

Sialic acid–containing glycoproteins ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/))
have been reported on the cytoplasmic face of the nuclear envelope. The sialic
acid–specific lectin, _Sambucus nigra_ ( _S. nigra_ ) agglutinin (SNA), was
shown to bind to several proteins, previously found to also contain O-βGlcNAc.
Two of these proteins were identified as major nucleoporins: p62 and p180.
Prior sialidase treatment blocked binding of SNA to these nuclear pore
proteins. Based on peptide- _N_ -glycosidase sensitivity, the sialic acids on
the p180 appeared to be on N-linked glycans. The authors also showed that SNA
blocked nuclear protein import in neuroblastoma cells, suggesting that the
sialic acids might have functional importance on the nuclear pore proteins. In
plants, a novel O-linked glycan has also been reported on a nuclear
pore–associated protein. This protein is recognized by the lectin WGA and
could be labeled using tritiated UDP-Gal and β4-galactosyltransferase, which
is specific for nonreducing terminal GlcNAc. The glycan, with an approximate
size of five sugars, was released by mild alkaline degradation consistent with
β-elimination from a Thr or Ser residue. Other notable reports of nuclear
glycoproteins are a heat-shock-like nuclear chaperone protein with GlcNAc-
binding activity, CBP70, which has been suggested to be N-glycosylated. A
subpopulation of prion protein may be N-glycosylated and found in the nucleus
possibly in association with the GlcNAc-binding lectin. As for the examples
above, however, confirmation by structural and linkage analyses are needed to
firmly establish the existence of these modifications.

Such cytoplasmic complex glycoconjugates may derive from the secretory pathway
itself. A sizable fraction of nascent proteins fail quality control of folding
and assembly in the rER ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)), and are
retrotranslocated to the cytoplasm as a part of ERAD (ER-associated
degradation), as depicted in [Figure
18.2A](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f2/?report=objectonly) (rER). Most of
these are N-glycosylated and are normally processed by a cytoplasmic _N_
-glycanase to remove the N-glycan before degradation by the 26S-proteasome or
an autophagic vacuole, or are recognized by N-glycan-dependent E3 ubiquitin
ligases. If these processes do not operate on a given protein, because the
N-glycan is modified in such a way that it is not recognized, or is
sequestered in a protein complex or the nucleus, then it may accumulate in the
cytoplasm and potentially execute a novel function that might depend on its
ER-derived glycan. In addition, there is evidence that endocytosed proteins,
such as cholera toxin, can gain access to the cytoplasm via this or a related
pathway. Furthermore, there is a growing body of literature that supports the
concept that cytokines, growth factors, and even their transmembrane
receptors, many of which are glycosylated, can translocate to the nucleus to
exert direct effects on transcription. Although the existence of these
transport pathways is controversial, they would, if they occur, provide a
source of cytoplasmic and nuclear glycoproteins with conventional glycan
modifications. Finally, occasional reports of cytoplasmic glycosylation in
pathological tissues raise the possibility that compartmental breakdowns
result in the exposure of cytoplasmic proteins to latent Golgi
glycosyltransferases.

In 1982, Marchase and colleagues showed the transfer of αGlc-1-phosphate from
UDP-Glc to O-linked mannosyl residues onto a single 62-kDa protein. The 62-kDa
cytosolic protein bearing O-mannose residues was subsequently identified as
parafusin, a protein that, in response to a secretagogue, reversibly
dissociates from cellular membranes and coordinates with release of Glc-PO4.
There is considerable biochemical evidence in support of the occurrence of
Glcα1-PO4 and PO4-Man linkages, likely to be conjoined in a single
phosphodiester moiety, in organisms as diverse as _Paramecium_ , birds, and
mammals. Parafusin was subsequently identified as a member of the
phosphoglucomutase (PGM) protein family, named after the enzyme that catalyzes
the interconversion of Glc-1-PO4 and Glc-6-PO4. Although parafusin itself
appears not to show PGM activity, there is evidence that the active PGM
protein from yeast and rat liver is similarly modified in extracts. Latency
studies established that both the novel glucose phosphotransferase acting on
parafusin and a Glc-1-phosphate phosphodiesterase that cleaves Glc-PO4 from
parafusin have their active sites within the cytoplasm. Cochromatography
studies of hydrolyzed parafusin from cells metabolically labeled with
radioactive sugar precursors suggest that PGM-like proteins are similarly
modified in vivo. The modification of PGM-like proteins is highly responsive
to calcium levels, and appears to regulate the association of parafusin with
the membrane. Unfortunately, nothing is known about the enzymes that catalyze
these modifications or the specific structures themselves. Nonetheless, these
findings suggest that both terminal mannose and dynamic Glc-1-phosphorylation
of PGM-like proteins may be important regulatory forms of cytoplasmic
glycosylation.

Another potential example of a cytoplasmic glycan comes from a study on
purified mammalian cytokeratin, which was reported to contain GalNAc and bind
lectins that recognize α1-3-linked GalNAc. [Lectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/lectin/) binding was sensitive to pretreatment with _N_
-acetylgalactosaminidase, but this does not rule out the possibility of a
contaminant protein. Additional potential examples are oxygen-regulated
protein 150, a putative cytoplasmic glycoprotein whose nuclear uptake is
inhibited by a plant lectin thought to be internalized by epithelial cells,
and a cytoplasmic isoform of carbonic anhydrase secreted from seminal gland
epithelial cells by ectocytosis. Again, the significance of these provocative
findings must await structural proof of the nature of the putative glycans.

Evidence for a cytoplasmic or nuclear function of a glycan would strengthen
the case for its normal existence in that compartment. One such function in
which a role for sugars has been implicated is nuclear transport. Molecules
larger than ∼40 kDa do not diffuse freely through nuclear pores and must be
specifically and actively transported into and out of the nucleus. Generally,
nuclear localization sequences (NLSs) consist of one or two stretches of
positive amino acids. However, Monsigny and colleagues have presented evidence
that sugars may also serve as nuclear localization signals. The synthetically
generated neoglycoproteins BSA-Glc, BSA-Fuc, and BSA-Man are rapidly
transported into the nucleus of permeabilized or microinjected living HeLa
cells, whereas bovine serum albumin (BSA) itself is not. Like the classical
basic peptide-mediated NLS pathway, the sugar-mediated nuclear transport
requires energy and is blocked by the lectin WGA. However, unlike the basic
peptide system, the sugar-mediated pathway does not require cytosolic factors,
and is not blocked by sulfhydryl-reactive chemicals. Additional evidence shows
that BSA substituted with β-di- _N_ -acetylchitobiosides (GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc) is
rapidly localized to purified nuclei in vitro by a pathway distinct from the
classically defined NLS systems. Validation of these fascinating results
awaits characterization of the components involved, and identification of
natural counterparts to the neoglycoproteins.

There are several possible origins of complex nucleocytoplasmic glycans
suggested by cytological and fractionation studies in animals and plants. As
exemplified by the above protist Skp1 and DNA glycosyltransferases, and by the
bacterially derived glycosyltransferases, nonconventional soluble enzyme
proteins may simply reside in the cytoplasm or nucleus and directly modify
proteins there. For example, several reports describe glycosyltransferase
activities in highly purified preparations of rat liver nuclei judged to be
approximately >99% pure by marker enzyme analysis. These studies document the
transfer of GlcNAc from UDP-GlcNAc to endogenous acceptors and show that at
least 80% of the activity is blocked by low concentrations of the antibiotic
tunicamycin (an inhibitor of formation of the N-glycan precursor), suggesting
the involvement of N-linked biosynthetic intermediates, such as _N_
-acetylglucosaminyl-pyrophosphoryl-dolichol (GlcNAc-PP-dolichol). Later
studies showed the direct transfer of chitobiose (GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc) from
chitobiosyldolichol to endogenous nuclear acceptors by these mammalian nuclear
preparations, suggesting a novel pathway of N-glycosylation. The products of
these in vitro reactions were found to be N-linked chitobiosyl moieties, based
on their sensitivity to peptide _N_ -glycosidase F and hydrazinolysis but
insensitivity to alkali-induced β-elimination ([Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). Similar studies have documented the presence of
nuclear mannosyltransferases. The finding that CMP (cytidine
5′-monophosphate)-sialic acid is synthesized in the mammalian nucleus offers
further support for the concept of nuclear glycosyltransferases. Although
these studies are provocative, they must also be interpreted with caution. The
ER, which is the widely accepted site of N-glycosylation ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)), is functionally contiguous with the outer nuclear
envelope, which also can fold into the interior. Even a minor contamination of
nuclear envelope could lead to misinterpretation of these findings. Also, it
is very difficult to purify nuclei such that other cellular components do not
nonspecifically adhere to the otherwise “pure” nuclei during their
preparation. Given these potential problems, widespread acceptance of the
existence of these nuclear glycosyltransferases must await independent
confirmation by alternative methods.

Recently, a remarkable N-linked glycan was characterized on a capsid protein
of a virus, PBCV-1. This capsid protein, VP54, is assembled,
posttranslationally modified, and incorporated into viral structures within
the cytoplasm of _Chlorella_ algae. X-ray diffraction analysis shows that VP54
possesses four sites for unconventional N-glycosylation and two sites of Ser-
glycosylation. Van Etten and colleagues have shown that one glycoform consists
of a branched decasaccharide containing seven different sugars including
D-Glc, D-Gal, D-Man, D-Xyl, L-Fuc, L-Ara, D-Rha, and L-Rha, and one L-Rha is
dimethylated. [Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) of
VP54 is at least partially virally encoded, and indeed the genome of PBCV-1
contains six sequences predicted to encode cytoplasmically localized
glycosyltransferases that lack targeting sequences for the secretory pathway.
Ten glycosyltransferases are predicted to account for the distinct linkages in
the decasaccharides, so it is likely that new classes of glycosyltransferase
genes will be discovered in this pathway. N-Glycosylation of VP54 is unusual
in that the Asn-attachment site is not associated with the canonical
N-glycosylation sequon used for N-glycosylation in the eukaryotic secretory
pathway and the linkage sugar is βGlc. This activity is reminiscent of NGT,
the prokaryotic cytoplasmic sugar nucleotide-dependent glycosyltransferase
that modifies adhesins that are exported to the cell surface ([Table
18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly)). One or two
α6-linked Glc residues extend the βGlc residue on HMW1C adhesin. Because
PBCV-1 eventually lyses its host, the product glycoprotein presumably also
functions outside of the alga. Thus, there is evidence for complex
glycosylation in the cytoplasm of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, yet these
glycoprotein products appear to function at the cell (or viral) surface,
converging with the conventional locale expected of protein-linked glycans
([Figure 18.2A](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f2/?report=objectonly),
cytoplasm).

Finally, the biosynthesis of several classes of glycolipids and
polysaccharides is initiated by membrane-associated glycosyltransferases whose
catalytic domains are situated at the cytoplasm-facing surface. This includes
early steps in the synthesis of glucoceramides, GPI anchors, and dolichyl-
linked N-glycosylation precursors. However, these precursors are ultimately
“flipped” to the other side of the membrane where they are extended and, in
the case of the GPI-anchor and N-glycan precursors, are transferred to
proteins within the lumen of the ER in the secretory pathway ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Cytosolic-oriented glycosyltransferases also
include transmembrane proteins that polymerize hyaluronic acid ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)), cellulose, chitin, and lipopolysaccharides, in
which the products are directly translocated across the plasma membrane. The
glycan products of these membrane-associated glycosyltransferases normally
exit the cytoplasmic space but, if this did not occur, they could serve as the
origin of novel, cytoplasmic, non-protein-linked glycoconjugates.

A special class of nucleocytoplasmic glycans is represented by the
glycosaminoglycans (or GAGs) ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). As early
as 1964, Yamashina and colleagues proposed the presence of glycosaminoglycans
in purified nuclei. In a fascinating series of subsequent studies, Kinoshita
and colleagues proposed the occurrence of nuclear heparan sulfates (HSs) in
developing sea urchin embryos. They found that heparin stimulated messenger
RNA (mRNA) synthesis in pregastrula but not in postgastrula embryos. Other
glycosaminoglycans, such as chondroitin sulfates and hyaluronan ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)) were without effect. Pulse-chase studies suggested
that the nuclear GAGs appeared first in the cytoplasm and were transported to
the nucleus. β-Xylosides, which are primers of chondroitin sulfate and HS
biosynthesis ([Chapters 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/) and
[55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)), blocked development of sea urchins, and addition
of postgastrula proteoglycans prevented this block. Pregastrula proteoglycans
did not prevent the β-xyloside-induced block to development. Microinjection of
proteoglycans into embryos blocked development at the stage from which they
were isolated. Clearly, given recent advances in the tools to study
proteoglycans, these potentially exciting observations warrant a critical
reexamination.

The first structural data proposing nuclear GAGs were published in 1989 by
Fedarko and Conrad. These workers radiolabeled rat hepatocytes with 35SO4,
isolated subcellular fractions, purified HSs, cleaved the HSs with nitrous
acid, and determined the structures of the fragments. Nuclear fractions were
found to contain 11% of the total cellular HSs, but were greatly enriched with
a unique molecular species with a high content of a novel structure: β-D-
glucuronosyl(2-SO4)αD-glucosamine- _N_ , _O_ -(SO4) disaccharides
(GlcUA-2-SO4). Given the unique nature of these structures, it is hard to
conceive how they could be derived by contamination of nuclear preparations
with cell surface HS molecules, which lack such structures. Subsequent pulse-
chase studies suggested that cell surface HS is taken into the nucleus and
modified to these unique nuclear molecular species. In support of the uptake
model, when unlabeled HS proteoglycan, that contains no GlcUA-2-SO4, was
incubated with cells, about 10% ended up within the nucleus, and resulted in
free HS chains containing the unusual disaccharide. Given the ability of HSs
to influence gene transcription in vitro, these studies could eventually prove
highly significant. In contrast, Hascall and colleagues used a new nuclear
isolation method to prepare nuclei from rat ovarian granulosa cells and found
dermatan sulfates, but not HSs, associated with the nucleus. These authors
emphasized the difficulties in isolating pure nuclei, and in proving the
existence of GAGs in native nuclei. Furthermore, all of the known
glycosyltransferases involved in the biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans have
their active sites in luminal compartments ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), and pathways for nuclear uptake of such large and
negatively charged molecules have not been described.

Using another approach, immunocytochemical studies probing for a GPI-anchored
HS proteoglycan (PG), glypican, have provided strong evidence for the nuclear
accumulation of this PG in addition to its traditionally accepted presence at
the cell surface. Although the mechanism of nuclear compartmentalization is
not known, there is evidence that the glypican polypeptide harbors a nuclear
localization sequence that is functional when grafted onto a neutral carrier
expressed in the cytoplasm. In a separate study, overexpression of a
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan core protein in cultured cells resulted in
accumulation of the core polypeptide in the cytoplasm and nucleus in addition
to the secretory pathway, indicating, as has been suggested for other
proteins, the possibility of dual compartmentalization. However, although
these studies provide an explanation for how proteoglycan core proteins might
accumulate in the nucleus, it is difficult to imagine how they have been
modified by the glycosaminoglycan synthases residing in the Golgi lumen.

Cytochemical studies using naturally occurring proteins with high affinity
binding to hyaluronic acid have been used to document accumulation of
hyaluronic acid in the nuclei of cultured cells. Intracellular hyaluronan
might represent a pool of polysaccharide that failed to translocate following
biosynthesis, as the catalytic domain of hyaluronic acid synthases is oriented
at the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane ([Figure
18.2A](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f2/?report=objectonly), plasma membrane).
Some hyaluronic acid–binding proteins naturally occur within the nucleus
raising the possibility of a physiological role for nuclear hyaluronan via
interaction with these hyaluronic acid–binding proteins. However, it is not
certain that hyaluronic acid is the natural ligand for these binding proteins.
An alternative possibility is that they interact with nuclear proteins that
have been modified by clusters of _O_ -βGlcNAc ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).

Mitochondria have been suggested to contain complex glycoconjugates based on
lectin-binding studies. Although most mitochondrial proteins are synthesized
within the cytoplasm under the direction of nuclear genes, two mitochondrial
glycoproteins appear to be conventionally N-glycosylated in the rER based on
pulse-chase labeling studies and susceptibility to _N_ -glycanase. These
glycoproteins might transit to mitochondria via a novel vesicle transport
pathway. Subsequently, several plant chloroplast proteins, including carbonic
anhydrase-1, α-amylase, and pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase in “higher”
plants, and Glx, Syn, MutS in diatoms, were also reported to be transported
from the rER as N-glycosylated proteins ([Table
18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly)). The presence of
N-glycans highlights their interesting biosynthetic origin and implicates a
novel vesicular transport pathway, but further studies are needed to assess
their roles in plastid functions.

In plants, mono- and digalactolipids (MGDG: 1,2-diacyl-3- _O_ -[β-D-Gal]-sn-
glycerol and DGDG: 1,2-diacyl-3-O-[α-D-Gal-(1,6)-O-β-D-Gal]-sn-glycerol) are
prominent lipids in thylakoid membranes and MGDG is essential for photosystem
function ([Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). Their synthesis is controlled
by UDP-Gal-dependent galactosyltransferases residing in the inner and outer
layer membranes of the chloroplast. Under conditions of phosphate deprivation,
the synthesis of these glycolipids is dramatically increased, becoming up to
70 mol% of glycerolipids. The glycolipids replace conventional phospholipids
such as phosphatidylcholine in a variety of other cellular membranes including
vacuoles, mitochondria, and the plasma membrane ([Table
18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly)). DGDG almost
exclusively resides in the cytoplasmic leaflet of these membranes and is thus
oriented toward the cytoplasm ([Figure
18.2A](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f2/?report=objectonly), chloroplasts),
which is opposite of the conventional orientation of glycolipids as known from
animal and yeast cells. Variants containing sulfoquinovose and GlcUA, which
conserve the negative charge, are also produced. Little is known about the
trafficking of these glycolipids. Given the functional importance of DGDG for
cells based on genetic studies, it will be interesting to understand how the
asymmetric distribution contributes to cytoplasmic functionality of the
cellular membranes.

The occurrence of cytoplasmic or nuclear glycoproteins or glycolipids
(oriented toward the cytoplasm) would suggest the potential parallel existence
of carbohydrate-binding proteins (or lectins) whose binding might contribute
to the function of the glycans. Many lines of evidence document the existence
of lectins that reside in the cytoplasm and/or nucleus. For example, Monsigny,
Hubert, and colleagues have shown that BSA-based neoglycoproteins derivatized
with L-Rha, D-GlcNAc, D-Glc, lactose, Man-6-P, and L-Fuc all bind to nuclei at
threefold higher affinity than underivatized BSA. In 1980, Feizi and
colleagues showed the specific binding of BSA-lactose to cryostat sections of
nuclei. However, little is known about the molecular nature of these putative
carbohydrate-binding proteins except for galectins-1 and -3 (see below) and
the heat-shock chaperone protein CBP70 (described above). CBP70 has GlcNAc-
binding activity that might recognize O-βGlcNAc-modified proteins.

The galectin family of lectins in animals, and the discoidin family of
cytoplasmic lectins in the amoebazoan _Dictyostelium_ , are high abundance
proteins that have carbohydrate-binding specificity generally directed toward
β-linked Gal and/or GalNAc ([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). Large pools
of these proteins are soluble in the cytoplasm, but cell biological studies
have shown that these proteins also reside at the cell surface and in the
pericellular matrix. These proteins lack typical amino-terminal signal
peptides and exit the cytoplasm by a poorly characterized, posttranslational,
unconventional, secretory mechanism that may avoid premature association with
secreted glycoproteins. Biochemical and genetic studies have uncovered
primarily extracellular functions for these lectins ([Chapter
36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)), suggesting that the cytoplasmic pools may be
precursors of functional extracellular pools. Nevertheless, Wang and
colleagues have shown that CBP35 (galectin-3) and possibly galectin-1 are
present in the nucleus as part of the HnRnP complex, where they appear to be
required for normal mRNA splicing in extracts. Interestingly, a
neoglycoprotein containing blood group A tetrasaccharide was found to
specifically inhibit mRNA splicing in vitro. However, at present there is only
limited evidence for a functional role of the carbohydrate-binding activity of
galectin 3 in mRNA splicing. In addition, a cytoplasmic function in regulating
apoptosis has been implicated for galectin-1, although a role for the
carbohydrate-binding activity has not been established. These findings
certainly leave open the possibility that galectins have important untested
functions via unknown cytoplasmic glycoconjugates.

Numerous other soluble cytoplasmic proteins have been assigned sugar-binding
activity that point to the potential significance of cytoplasmic
glycoconjugates. A Golgi-associated actin-binding protein in _Dictyostelium_
—comitin—has a Man-binding activity. In plants, cytoplasmic mannose- and
GlcNAc-binding lectins are induced by various kinds of biotic and abiotic
effectors. Further studies are warranted to evaluate the functional
significance of the glycan-binding activities of these interesting proteins.

Several filamentous fungi express cytoplasmic lectins with glycan-binding
specificities that do not seem to be expressed in the fungi themselves
([Chapter 23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)). Aebi, Kunzler, and colleagues have
provided compelling evidence that these lectins are toxic to predators like
roundworms, mosquitoes, and amoebae, and represent a form of innate immunity.
It is interesting to speculate that the cytoplasm represents a “safe” depot to
stow carbohydrate reactive proteins as a defense for other cells in the
community should damage cause their release from individual members. Thus, the
occurrence of a lectin does not necessarily imply the existence of a cognate
glycan in the same compartment.

Overall, there are many tantalizing clues for the existence and importance of
glycoconjugates with simple or complex glycans within the nucleus and
cytoplasm, in addition to the ubiquitous O-βGlcNAc ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Well-characterized examples involve novel
linkages to the protein via tyrosine in animal and yeast glycogenin, via
hydroxyproline in protist Skp1, and via arginine in bacteria ([Table
18.1](/books/NBK453084/table/CH18TB1/?report=objectonly)). The known
glycosyltransferases that mediate these modifications are traditional
cytoplasmically localized proteins that evolved from the same evolutionary
lineages that generated the enzymes of the secretory pathway. At present,
these modifications appear to be confined to specific protein targets.

Cytoplasmic glycosylation is also a strategy for pathogens to control host
cell responses and these mechanisms also frequently involve novel linkages and
target single proteins. These examples clearly establish the importance of
cytoplasmic and nuclear glycosylation in protein-specific regulation, which
contrasts with the relatively broad distribution and heterogeneity of glycans
on cell surface, extracellular matrix, and blood proteins. However, much
remains to be explored to establish the generality of this concept.
Significantly, there exists substantial indirect evidence for much more
extensive complex cytoplasmic glycosylation in animal cells, and cell
biologists continue to illustrate novel mechanisms of protein
compartmentalization that could allow a protein that is glycosylated in one
place to be transferred to another, as more commonly occurs in prokaryotes
([Figure 18.2B](/books/NBK453084/figure/ch18.f2/?report=objectonly)).
Nevertheless, proof of the implied prevalence of familiar or unfamiliar
glycans will require detailed structural evidence in conjunction with
supporting biosynthetic, cell biological and functional studies. Given that
much of what is known about cytoplasmic glycosylation has only recently
emerged, it is indeed likely that much remains to be discovered in this realm,
and that these pathways are much more common in both eukaryotes and
prokaryotes than is currently appreciated. This promises to be an exciting and
important area of research in the future.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Jenny H.L. Chik,
Nicholas Keul, Sarah Baas Robinson, and Krithika Vaidyanathan.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.019

This chapter presents an overview of the dynamic modification of serine or
threonine hydroxyl moieties on nuclear, mitochondrial, and cytoplasmic
proteins by O-linked β-linked _N_ -acetylglucosamine, termed O-β-GlcNAc or
simply O-GlcNAc. This seemingly simple carbohydrate modification plays key
roles in cellular physiology and disease progression. Underpinning these
observations are the thousands of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins that regulate
cellular pathways such as epigenetics, gene expression, translation, protein
degradation, signal transduction, mitochondrial bioenergetics, the cell cycle,
and protein localization.

O-GlcNAc was unexpectedly discovered in 1983, when purified bovine milk
galactosyltransferase and its radiolabeled donor substrate (UDP-[3H]galactose)
were used to probe for GlcNAc-terminating glycoconjugates on the surface of
living murine thymocytes, splenic B- and T-lymphocytes, and macrophages.
Galactosyltransferase is a Golgi glycosyltransferase that attaches galactose
in a β1-4 linkage to almost any terminal _N_ -acetylglucosamine residue
([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). Contrary to expectations, product
analyses, including release from protein by alkali-induced β-elimination and
resistance to cleavage by peptide-N-glycosidase F (PNGase F; [Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)), showed that most of the labeled galactosylated
glycans existed within a minor fraction of broken cells, as single O-linked
GlcNAc moieties ([Figure
19.1](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f1/?report=objectonly)). Studies of the
subcellular localization of O-GlcNAc in rat liver established that O-GlcNAc is
abundant within chromatin, concentrated on the nuclear pores of the nuclear
envelope, and also present within the cytoplasm of the cell ([Figure
19.2](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f2/?report=objectonly); [Table
19.1](/books/NBK453063/table/CH19TB1/?report=objectonly)).

O-GlcNAc is distinct from other common forms of protein glycosylation in
several respects: (1) it occurs mostly within the nuclear, mitochondrial, and
cytoplasmic compartments of the cell; (2) the GlcNAc moiety is generally not
elongated or modified to form more complex structures; and (3) O-GlcNAc is
attached and removed multiple times in the life of a protein, often cycling
rapidly on a protein. Of note, this modification is distinct from the recently
described extracellular O-GlcNAc found on proteins containing epidermal growth
factor (EGF) repeats ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). The enzyme that
catalyzes the addition of O-GlcNAc to EGF repeats (EOGT) is located in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is closely related to the enzymes that catalyze
mucin-like glycosylation. Unlike intracellular
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/), modification
of EGF repeats by O-GlcNAc is static and can be extended by the addition of
galactose.

Recent studies show that O-GlcNAc is found on thousands of nuclear,
mitochondrial, and cytoplasmic proteins, including many heavily studied
proteins such as RNA polymerase II, histones, and ribosomal proteins ([Figure
19.2](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f2/?report=objectonly); [Table
19.1](/books/NBK453063/table/CH19TB1/?report=objectonly)). Yet, although
phosphorylation was discovered in 1954, O-GlcNAc was not discovered until
1983. So why did O-GlcNAc remain undetected for so long? First, the long-
standing standard dogma was that glycosylation (other than glycogen storage)
did not occur with the nucleocytosolic compartment. Second, unlike charged
modifications (e.g., phosphate), addition and removal of O-GlcNAc generally
does not affect the migration of polypeptides on SDS-PAGE (sodium dodecyl
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis). A small shift in protein
migration might be seen if the O-GlcNAc residues are highly clustered or if
the protein is extensively O-GlcNAcylated at multiple sites (e.g., p62 nuclear
pore protein). Third, all cells contain high levels of hydrolases, including
abundant lysosomal hexosaminidases and nucleocytoplasmic β-N-
acetylglucosaminidases, that rapidly remove O-GlcNAc from intracellular
proteins when the cell is damaged or lysed. Thus, O-GlcNAc is often lost
during the isolation of a protein. Finally, O-GlcNAc is particularly difficult
to detect by physical techniques, such as mass spectrometry, because it often
occurs at substoichiometric amounts on a protein and readily falls off the
polypeptide during the ionization process in a mass spectrometer. In both
electrospray ionization ([ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrosprayionizationesi/)) mass spectrometry and in matrix-assisted
laser desorption time of flight ([MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)-[TOF](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/timeofflighttof/)) mass spectrometry analyses of a mixture of unmodified
and O-GlcNAc–modified peptides, not only is the O-GlcNAc lost during
ionization but the signal from the O-GlcNAc-modified peptides that remain is
suppressed by the presence of the unmodified peptide. Our ability to detect
O-GlcNAc has been improved in recent years by the development of monoclonal
antibodies that detect O-GlcNAc, the use of “click chemistry” compatible
sugars ([Chapters 51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/) and [56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)),
and the invention of more sophisticated mass spectrometric techniques, such as
electron transfer dissociation ([ETD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrontransferdissociationetd/)) mass spectrometry.

The dynamic cycling of O-GlcNAc on proteins is regulated by the concerted
actions of enzymes encoded by just two genes: the O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT)
and a neutral β-hexosaminidase known as O-GlcNAcase (OGA) ([Figure
19.1](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f1/?report=objectonly)). The regulation of
the transcription start site and alternative splicing results in the synthesis
of at least three isoforms of OGT and two isoforms of OGA. Nonetheless, the
question remains: “how can so few enzymes specifically glycosylate and
deglycosylate so many substrates?” Although both OGT and OGA each have only a
single catalytic subunit, they actually exist within the cell as a multitude
of different holoenzymes in which their catalytic subunits are noncovalently
bound to a myriad of accessory proteins that appear to control their targeting
([Figure 19.3](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f3/?report=objectonly)).

O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT; uridine diphospho- _N_
-acetylglucosamine:polypeptide β-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase; EC
2.4.1.255) catalyzes the addition of _N_ -acetylglucosamine from UDP-GlcNAc to
specific serine or threonine residues to form a β-O-glycosidic linkage. The
enzyme was first identified and purified from rat liver and subsequently
cloned from rat, human, _Caenorhabditis elegans,_ and other organisms _. OGT_
resides on the X chromosome (Xq13 in humans) near the centromere and is among
the most highly conserved proteins from worms to man. To date, three isoforms
of OGT have been well characterized: (1) the nucleocytoplasmic or full-length
variant (ncOGT), which is 110 kDa; (2) a short isoform of OGT (sOGT), which is
78 kDa; and (3) a variant of OGT that is targeted to the mitochondria (mOGT;
∼90 kDa). In the nucleus and cytoplasm, OGT appears to form multimers,
consisting of one or more 110-kDa subunits and 78-kDa subunits.

ncOGT has two distinct domains separated by a putative nuclear localization
sequence. The amino terminus of each OGT subunit contains tetratricopeptide
repeats (TPRs), which can number up to 12 (species dependent). The TPR domain
serves as a protein–protein interaction domain and mediates interactions of
the enzyme with substrates and targeting proteins ([Figure
19.3](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f3/?report=objectonly)). The major
variation between the three (above) variants is in the number and sequence of
the TPR repeats. The crystal structure of the human TPR domain of ncOGT shows
that the repeats occur as stacked α-helical domains, forming a “tube-like”
structure with a remarkable structural similarity to the armadillo repeat
domain of the nuclear transport protein importin-α. The TPRs of OGT are also
required for the multimerization of OGT subunits. The carboxy-terminal domain
of OGT appears to have evolved from the glycogen phosphorylase superfamily of
enzymes, and it contains the UDP-GlcNAc–binding and catalytic sites of the
enzyme.

The regulation of OGT is quite complex and still not well understood. OGT is
itself O-GlcNAcylated and also tyrosine-phosphorylated ([Figure
19.3](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f3/?report=objectonly)). Tyrosine
phosphorylation appears to activate the enzyme, but the role of O-GlcNAc on
OGT is not yet clear. Recent studies suggest that OGT is also targeted and
regulated by Ser/Thr phosphorylation; AMPK, CAMKIV, and GSK3β have been
reported to modify OGT altering either the localization or activity of the
enzyme. Purified or recombinant OGT modifies small synthetic peptides based on
known sites from O-GlcNAcylated proteins, but OGT appears to require accessory
proteins to modify full-length protein substrates efficiently.

The high-energy nucleotide sugar used by OGT is UDP-GlcNAc, which is
synthesized by the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP). Increased flux
through the HBP, a result of increased glucose levels, has been shown to
modulate O-GlcNAc levels ([Figure
19.4](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f4/?report=objectonly)). On transfer of
GlcNAc to proteins, UDP is released, which is a potent feedback inhibitor of
OGT. Under conditions during which UDP is rapidly removed (as occurs within
the cell), OGT activity is dependent on the UDP-GlcNAc level over a remarkable
range of concentrations (from the low nm range to well more than 50 mm). Of
note, the substrate specificity of OGT appears to change at different UDP-
GlcNAc concentrations, suggesting that OGT regulates cellular processes in a
manner dependent on nutritional status.

Nucleocytoplasmic β-N-acetylglucosaminidase (O-GlcNAcase; OGA; EC 3.2.1.169)
was first identified as a neutral cytosolic hexosaminidase (referred to as
“hexosaminidase C”). OGA was purified from rat kidney and bovine brain, and
the human gene was cloned using peptide sequence information. The _OGA_ gene
was found to be identical to _MGEA5_ , a putative hyaluronidase genetically
identified because of its association with meningiomas. There are two well-
characterized isoforms of OGA (short and full-length), which appear to arise
from alternative splicing. Both variants contain an amino-terminal glycosidase
domain related to hyaluronidases. The short OGA is identical to full-length
OGA (916 amino acids) for the first 662 amino acids but possesses an
alternative carboxy-terminal sequence 15 amino acids in length. Sequence
analyses suggest that full-length OGA is a bifunctional enzyme, with the
carboxyl terminus displaying homology with the _GCN5_ histone acetyl
transferase (HAT) family. During the latter stages of apoptosis (regulated
cell death), the executioner caspase (caspase-3) cleaves OGA to separate the
HAT and OGA domains. Like OGT, OGA also interacts in a dynamic fashion with a
very large number of cellular proteins, but the locations of interaction sites
on the enzyme have not been determined.

Unlike the relatively static nature of mature N- and O-glycans on
glycoproteins, O-GlcNAc cycles rapidly on and off most proteins. Early studies
showed that mitogen or antigen activation of lymphocytes rapidly decreased
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) of many
cytoplasmic proteins, but concomitantly increased O-GlcNAcylation of many
nuclear proteins. Likewise, neutrophils were shown to rapidly modulate
O-GlcNAcylation of several proteins in response to chemotactic agents.
Recently, changes in O-GlcNAc cycling have been shown in response to cellular
stress, the cell cycle, neuron depolarization, and insulin signaling. Pulse-
chase analyses have revealed that O-GlcNAc residues on small heat-shock
protein in the lens (α-crystallin) and on intermediate filament proteins
(cytokeratins) turn over more rapidly than the polypeptide chains to which
they are attached. These observations, combined with those demonstrating that
OGT uses amino acid motifs similar to proline-directed mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinases, suggest that O-GlcNAc is a regulatory posttranslational
modification analogous to phosphorylation.

To date, nucleocytoplasmic O-β-GlcNAc has been found in all multicellular
organisms investigated, ranging from filamentous fungi, worms, insects, and
plants to humans. Recent data suggests that the O-GlcNAc modification is also
found in a subset of prokaryotes such as _Listeria monocytogenes_. It is
currently unclear if the enzymes responsible for this modification are related
to OGT or EOGT. To date, O-GlcNAc and the enzymes that control its cycling do
not appear to exist in yeast, such as _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ or
_Schizosaccharomyces pombe_. However, recently, it was discovered that _S.
cerevisiae_ have O-mannose moieties on the same proteins and at the same sites
where O-GlcNAc is found in multicellular organisms. O-α-GlcNAc appears to be a
common modification of cell-surface and extracellular proteins in protozoa,
where it is attached by enzymes structurally related to the lumenal
protein:O-GalNAc transferases (ppGalNAc-Ts) in mammals ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). The presence of the O-α-GlcNAc modification has
complicated the analysis of O-β-GlcNAc in protozoa; however, O-GlcNAc and OGT
have been reported in _Giardia lamblia_ and _Cryptosporidium parvum._
O-GlcNAc–modified proteins have also been found on many viruses that infect
metazoans (e.g., adenovirus, SV40, cytomegalovirus, rotavirus, baculovirus,
plum pox, HIV, and others). In viruses, instead of being localized on the
outside capsid of the virus where “classical” N- or O-glycans are found
([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)), O-GlcNAc is found deep within the
viruses, on tegument and other regulatory proteins, close to the nucleic acid
components.

Genetic and subsequent biochemical studies in _Arabidopsis thaliana_ showed
that the genes _SPY_ and _SECRET AGENT_ regulate growth hormone (gibberellic
acid) signaling, and later studies established that both of these genes encode
O-β-GlcNAc transferases. Mutations in either _SPY_ or _SECRET AGENT_ cause
severe growth phenotypes, but they are not lethal. However, simultaneous
mutation of both genes is lethal. Studies in rice, potatoes, and other plants
have also indicated that [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/oglcnacylation/) is important for growth regulation. Unlike plants,
mammals and insects appear to have only a single gene encoding the catalytic
subunit of the _OGT_. Using _Cre-LoxP_ conditional gene disruption in mice,
_OGT_ was shown to be required for the viability of embryonic stem cells.
Tissue-targeted disruption in mice and disruption of _OGT_ expression in cell
culture have established that O-GlcNAcylation is essential for viability at
the single-cell level in mammalian cells. Disruption of _OGT_ in the worm _C.
elegans_ causes defective carbohydrate metabolism, abnormalities in dauer
formation, and reduced life span. In Drosophila, homozygous mutants survive
for >5 days until the late larval stage, but subsequently die in the pupal
cases. Targeted, inducible deletion of _OGT_ in αCAMKII-positive (excitory)
neurons in brains of adult mice rapidly results in morbidly obese mice because
of defects in satiety, further supporting the roles of O-GlcNAcylation as a
nutrient sensor. The highly homologous and conserved nature of _OGT_ among
metazoans allows a transgene encoding the human sequence of OGT to be used to
rescue _OGT_ null _Drosophila melanogaster_. Recently, OGA has been disrupted
in both _C. elegans_ and mammalian models. Like the OGT null, the _C. elegans_
OGA null has defective carbohydrate metabolism and abnormalities in dauer
formation. In contrast to the OGT null, in _C. elegans,_ in which OGA has been
disrupted, the worms have an extended life span. In murine models, deletion of
OGA leads to perinatal lethality that is associated with genomic instability
and severe metabolic phenotypes. The OGA heterozygote mouse shows widespread
changes in transcription and metabolism, and an enhanced dependence on glucose
metabolism.

Studies from several laboratories have described O-GlcNAcylated proteins from
virtually all cellular compartments representing nearly all functional classes
of protein ([Figure 19.2](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f2/?report=objectonly);
[Table 19.1](/books/NBK453063/table/CH19TB1/?report=objectonly)). O-GlcNAc is
particularly abundant within the nucleus, where it occurs on the
transcriptional regulatory machinery including RNA polymerase II catalytic
subunit carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) and basal, as well as other,
transcription factors, histones, and DNA methyltransferases.
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) also appears
to be particularly abundant on proteins involved in signaling, stress
responses, and energy metabolism. Nearly 90 proteins within the mitochondria
are dynamically O-GlcNAcylated with the highest concentration found within the
electron transport chain. It also occurs on many cytoskeletal regulatory
proteins, such as those regulating actin assembly (e.g., vinculin, talin,
vimentin, and ankyrin) and tubulin assembly (e.g., MAPs, dynein, and tau).
Even α-tubulin itself is dynamically modified by O-GlcNAc, but the
stoichiometry appears to be low. Intermediate filaments, such as cytokeratins
and neurofilaments in brain, are also heavily modified by O-GlcNAc.

Individual sites modified by O-GlcNAc have been identified on numerous
proteins. Although there is no consensus motif that dictates glycosylation by
OGT, proline and valine residues are common on either side of the modified
hydroxyl amino acid. The other O-GlcNAc sites seemingly have little in common
at the primary sequence level, but they have sequences similar to those also
recognized by different kinases. Many of the identified O-GlcNAc sites have
high “PEST” scores, a sequence motif that is associated with rapid degradation
of a protein. A few studies suggest that
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) within the
PEST sequence prevents rapid degradation of the protein.

Site-mapping studies have shown that protein kinases and OGT can use the same
serine and threonine residues, suggesting that a complex interplay exists
between these two posttranslational modifications that fine tunes signal
transduction networks. In fact, major enzymes that remove O-phosphate, protein
phosphatase 1 β and γ, are in a dynamic complex with OGT indicating that in
many cases the same enzyme complex both removes O-phosphate and concomitantly
attaches O-GlcNAc ([Figure
19.1](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f1/?report=objectonly)). One example of a
protein in which phosphorylation and O-GlcNAc appear competitive is the CTD
repeat domain (YSPTSPS) of RNA polymerase II, which can contain as many as
three O-GlcNAc residues per repeat. After the initiation step of the
transcription cycle, O-GlcNAc on the CTD is removed and replaced with
O-phosphate, initiating the elongation phase of transcription. In vitro
studies have shown that synthetic peptides with up to ten CTD repeats
(comprising 70 amino acids) cannot be phosphorylated by CTD kinases if they
contain even a single O-GlcNAc moiety. Likewise, these CTD peptides cannot be
O-GlcNAcylated if even one of the repeats contains a single O-phosphate
residue.

On some proteins (e.g., casein kinase II), O-GlcNAc and O-phosphate occur at
separate but adjacent sites, yet they still appear to be reciprocal with each
other. However, on other proteins, the relationship between O-GlcNAc and
O-phosphate dynamics remains unclear. For example, on cytokeratins,
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) and
O-phosphorylation appear to be independently regulated, but may occur mutually
exclusively on completely different subsets of the same polypeptides.
Complicating this relationship further, recent data has shown that many
kinases are O-GlcNAc-modified and that glycosylation can alter the activity
and their association with substrates.

Like O-phosphorylation, the specific functions of O-GlcNAc depend on the
protein and sites to which the moiety is attached. However, some generalities
are emerging. As discussed above, one of the major functions of O-GlcNAc is to
prevent O-phosphorylation and, by doing so, to modulate signaling and
transcription in response to cellular nutrients or stress.

[Genome](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/genome/)-wide studies have shown that
OGT, OGA, and O-GlcNAc are found on thousands of promoters in _C. elegans_.
Deletion of either OGT or OGA has a profound, but complicated effect, on
transcription. Consistent with key roles for O-GlcNAc, deletion of OGT from
_C. elegans_ (L1 stage) results in the up-regulation of 299 transcripts and
the suppression of 389 transcripts; whereas deletion of OGA results in the up-
regulation of 218 transcripts and the suppression 291 transcripts. These
complicated effects likely result from the observation that RNA polymerase II
and the basal transcription complex are O-GlcNAc-modified. Moreover, O-GlcNAc
directly regulates the activities of a variety of transcription factors
including Sp1, estrogen receptors, STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5), NF-κB (nuclear factor- κB), p53, YY1 (Yin Yang 1), Elf-1
(E74-like factor 1), c-Myc, Rb (retinoblastoma), PDX-1 (pancreatic and
duodenal homeobox 1), CREB (cAMP response element binding), forkhead, and
others.

In addition to modulating transcription directly, O-GlcNAc has been strongly
implicated in mediating epigenetics. For instance, recent studies have shown
that histones (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) are modified by O-GlcNAc. Moreover, many
epigenetic regulators are themselves O-GlcNAc-modified or associate with
OGT/OGA. OGT associates with the ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins,
mSin3A/HDAC complexes, and the Polycomb group (PcG) proteins that regulate DNA
methylation. In Drosophila _,_ OGT, which is allelic with super sex combs
(sxc), plays a role in Polycomb repression. The association of OGT with the
PRC2 complex is critical in maintaining methylation of DNA and suppressing
transcription.

O-GlcNAc appears to modulate various stages of protein expression, stability,
and turnover. First, at least 15 well-characterized ribosomal proteins and
several associated translational factors are O-GlcNAcylated. It has been
proposed that the activity of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) is
regulated by its binding to p67. The p67 protein is O-GlcNAcylated, and the
interaction between O-GlcNAcylated p67 and eIF2 prevents phosphorylation, thus
promoting translation. Second, O-GlcNAc has been reported to prevent protein
aggregation, and this is important in models of neurodegenerative disease and
during injury. Third, [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/oglcnacylation/) of proteins has been reported to increase their half-
life. Reports suggest that this is due to increased stability of recently
translated proteins, suppression of proteasome activity, and reduced targeting
of proteins for degradation. Last, it appears that the 26S proteasome itself
is O-GlcNAc-modified. Recent proteomic analyses of the 26S proteasome have
shown that 5 of 19 and 9 of 14 proteins of the catalytic and regulatory cores,
respectively, are modified by O-GlcNAc. Increased O-GlcNAcylation of the Rpt2
ATPase, a component of the 19S cap of the proteasome, blocks its ATPase
activity, reducing proteasome-catalyzed degradation. It has been suggested
that O-GlcNAcylation of the proteasome allows the cell to respond to metabolic
needs by controlling the availability of amino acids and altering the half-
lives of key regulatory proteins.

Impaired glucose metabolism has been linked to the onset of several
neurodegenerative diseases, and one feature is the reduced
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) of key
proteins. OGT and OGA map to loci linked to Parkinson's dystonia and late-
onset Alzheimer's disease (AD), suggesting that changes in the expression and
activity of these enzymes may contribute to the onset of neurodegenerative
diseases. Consistent with a model in which decreased O-GlcNAcylation
exacerbates the side effects of AD, as well as frontotemporal dementia and
parkinsonism, increasing O-GlcNAc levels artificially reduces plaque formation
and improves cognition in murine models.

AD is characterized by the production and oligomerization of amyloid peptide
β1-42, which is derived from proteolytic processing of amyloid-β precursor
protein. The appearance of amyloid peptide in cerebrospinal fluid is
concomitant with a reduction in glucose metabolism and hyperphosphorylation
and oligomerization of tau. Hyperphosphorylated tau is ultimately secreted
into the cerebrospinal fluid, where it aggregates to form toxic
neurofibrillary tangles (PHF [paired helical filament]-tau). These events
precede neurodegeneration and brain atrophy. At a molecular level, O-GlcNAc is
thought to counteract the effects of AD at several points. First,
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) of γ-secretase
suppresses its activity, reducing the production of amyloid peptide β1-42.
Second, on tau, O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation appear reciprocal. Recent
studies on tau have established that O-GlcNAcylation negatively regulates its
O-phosphorylation in a site-specific manner both in vitro and in vivo. These
data suggest that O-GlcNAcylation can suppress phosphorylation of tau, and
thus reduce the formation of the toxic PHF-tau. Last, O-GlcNAcylated tau
appears less likely to aggregate in vitro when compared with unmodified tau.
These data suggest that not only does O-GlcNAc prevent toxic
hyperphosphorylation of tau, but that O-GlcNAc stabilizes tau protein
structure. Drugs that inhibit O-GlcNAcase to raise O-GlcNAc are in clinical
trials for AD.

Altered [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) has
been reported for other proteins involved in neurodegenerative disease.
Neurofilaments appear to be hypo-O-GlcNAcylated in neurons from patients with
Lou Gehrig's disease (ALS [amyotrophic lateral sclerosis] and MND [motor
neuron disease]). Clathrin-assembly proteins AP-3 and AP-180 are both modified
by O-GlcNAc, and these modifications decline in AD, suggesting that reduced
O-GlcNAc is associated with the loss of synaptic vesicle recycling.
Altogether, the current data points to potentially significant roles of the
O-GlcNAc modification in normal neuronal function and in the molecular
mechanisms underlying the pathology of neurodegenerative disease.

Perhaps the best-understood function of O-GlcNAc is its role in the regulation
of insulin signaling and as a mediator of glucose toxicity (see [Figure
19.4](/books/NBK453063/figure/ch19.f4/?report=objectonly)). The HBP is in a
unique position to sense nutrients, coordinating cellular metabolism in
response to nucleotide levels, acetyl-CoA, nitrogen metabolism (glutamine),
and glucose levels. Flux through the HBP and subsequent changes in O-GlcNAc
levels are thought to mediate signaling pathways, inducing an appropriate
response from cells given their nutritional state. For instance, increased
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) of PDX-1, a
pancreatic β-cell transcription factor that controls insulin transcription,
increases its affinity for DNA and results in increased proinsulin
transcription.

The first studies to link glucosamine metabolism directly with the toxicity of
glucose in diabetes showed that glucosamine is many times more potent than
glucose in inducing insulin resistance, one hallmark of type II diabetes, in
cultured adipocytes. These studies also showed that the ability of glucose to
induce insulin resistance could be blocked by deoxynorleucine (DON), a drug
that inhibits glutamine:fructose amidotransferase (GFAT, the enzyme that
converts fructose-6-P to glucosamine-6-P), and that this blockage could be
bypassed by adding glucosamine to the culture media ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). In 2002, two seminal studies suggested that
aberrant [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/), a
result of elevated UDP-GlcNAc levels, is one molecular mechanism by which
glucose and glucosamine metabolism led to insulin resistance. Collectively,
these studies showed that artificially increasing O-GlcNAcylation in
adipocytes or muscle blocks insulin signaling at several points, and
overexpression of _OGT_ in muscle or adipose tissue in transgenic mice causes
insulin resistance and hyperleptinemia. Recent data shows that overexpression
of OGT in the liver also induces insulin resistance and dyslipidemia.
Consistent with these data, overexpression of OGA in the liver rescues
circulating glucose levels in diabetic mice. Aberrant O-GlcNAcylation is also
associated with many of the complications arising from Type 2 diabetes
mellitus. For instance, inappropriate O-GlcNAcylation is associated with
mitochondrial dysfunction and contractile defects in the hearts of diabetic
mice. Based on these and other studies, elevated levels of O-GlcNAc have been
characterized in several models of diabetes and are being investigated as a
marker of prediabetes.

The Warburg effect describes a common metabolic phenotype of cancer cells in
which anaerobic glycolysis is used in preference to oxidative phosphorylation.
One consequence of this phenotype is increased glucose transport and
subsequently increased flux of metabolites through the HBP. Recent studies
suggest that one outcome of the Warburg effect is increased
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) (prostate,
breast, lung, colon, and liver) and that these changes in glycosylation
modulate signaling pathways, metabolism, and transcriptional profiles.
Collectively, changes in O-GlcNAcylation are thought to promote resistance to
cell death stimuli and augmentation of angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis, and
proliferation, thus enhancing the cancer cell phenotype. Supporting these data
is the fact that suppressing the activity of OGT reduces proliferation and
migration of cancer cells. Numerous mechanisms have been reported, and these
changes in O-GlcNAcylation target changes in transcription, metabolism, and
signaling. For example, O-GlcNAcylation of phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK1) shifts
metabolites into the pentose phosphate pathway, augmenting glutathione levels
and thus enhancing the ability of cancer cells to withstand oxidative stress.
Together, these data suggest that detection of key O-GlcNAcylated proteins and
expression of OGT/OGA may provide novel biomarkers for the early detection of
human cancer. Given the dependence of cancer cells on O-GlcNAc, targeting OGT
and other components of the HBP may reduce the aggressiveness of cancer cells
while sensitizing them to chemotherapeutic drugs.

In every mammalian cell type examined to date, cellular stress initiates a
signal that results in a rapid and global increase in
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) on a multitude
of proteins. Levels of O-GlcNAc increase rapidly in response to cellular
injury in both in vitro (heat shock, ethanol, UV, hypoxia/reoxygenation,
reductive, oxidative, and osmotic stress) and in vivo (ischemia
preconditioning and remote ischemic preconditioning) models. Dynamic changes
in the O-GlcNAc modification appear to result from changes in the activity and
expression of OGT and OGA, as well as flux through the HBP. Several lines of
evidence suggest that stress-induced elevations in O-GlcNAcylation promote a
survival signaling program in cells and tissues: (1) suppressing O-GlcNAc
levels, pharmacologically and genetically, sensitizes cells to oxidative,
osmotic, and heat stress; and (2) elevating O-GlcNAc levels, pharmacologically
and genetically, promotes survival in models of heat stress, hypoxia
reoxygenation, oxidative stress, trauma hemorrhage, and ischemic reperfusion
injury of the heart. Consistent with these observations, artificial modulation
of O-GlcNAc levels appears to target pathways known to modulate cellular
survival. For instance, in models of heat stress, dynamic O-GlcNAcylation
promotes the induction of heat shock proteins, chaperones that promote
survival by refolding proteins and inhibiting proapoptotic pathways. In models
of myocardial infarction (heart attack), elevating O-GlcNAcylation has been
shown to suppress all of the hallmarks of ischemia reperfusion injury, and
include mitochondrial dysfunction, ER stress, increased reactive oxygen
species, opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, and
calcium overload. Despite these compelling data, our understanding of the
molecular events that underlie these observations remains unclear. Elucidating
how increasing O-GlcNAcylation helps a cell to survive stressful conditions
should provide novel targets for the development of therapeutics for treating
conditions such as stroke and myocardial infarction.

During the past three decades, [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/oglcnacylation/) has been shown to be a sensor of cellular state
(nutrition, stress, cell-cycle state) regulating or modulating nearly every
cellular process, including signaling, transcription, translation,
cytoskeletal functions, and cell division. O-GlcNAc plays critical roles in
chronic diseases of aging, including diabetes, cancer, neurodegeneration, and
cardiomyopathies. However, the global importance of O-GlcNAc remains
unappreciated by most researchers. The modification is difficult to detect by
standard biochemical methods, it is labile in mass spectrometers, and there is
a profound lack of facile tools to study its biological functions. Improved
methods for site-mapping O-GlcNAc, methods for altering its stoichiometry at
single sites on proteins, and site-specific antibodies for hundreds of key
proteins will be required if we are to understand the biological significance
of this essential and ubiquitous protein modification. Elucidation of
O-GlcNAc's roles in glucose toxicity in diabetes and in mechanisms of
neoplasia and its functions in neurons are key future areas of investigation.
After 30 years of investigation, we are still only beginning to understand the
remarkable significance of O-GlcNAcylation in all aspects of eukaryotic
biology.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Jarrod W. Barnes,
Albert Lee, and Krithika Vaidyanathan.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.020

This chapter provides an overview of glycosylation patterns across biological
taxa and discusses glycan complexity and diversity from an evolutionary
perspective. As much of the currently available information concerns
vertebrates, this chapter emphasizes comparisons between vertebrate glycans
and those of other taxa. Evolutionary processes that likely determine
generation of glycan diversity are briefly considered, including intrinsic
host glycan-binding protein functions and interactions of hosts with extrinsic
pathogens or symbionts.

The genetic code is shared by all known organisms, and core functions such as
gene transcription and energy generation are conserved across taxa. Complex
glycans are found in all organisms in nature, and some have argued that
polysaccharides were the original macromolecules contributing to the origin of
life itself. Regardless of their origins, they vary immensely in structure and
expression both within and between evolutionary lineages. Partly because of
inherent difficulties in elucidating their structures, our knowledge about
this diversity remains limited, and there are few comprehensive data sets. For
many taxa, there is a lack of any information on glycan profiles. Sufficient
data are available to indicate that despite the fact that all living cells
require a glycocalyx (a dense and complex array of cell-surface glycans),
there is no evidence for a universal “glycan code,” akin to the genetic code.

Importantly, there are no single genes for glycans. They are synthesized and
modified by a network of enzymes, and glycophenotypes represent the outcome of
coexpressed gene networks. Indeed, glycans expressed by most free-living
Bacteria (Eubacteria) and Archaea have relatively little in common with those
of eukaryotes. They contain a much larger number of monosaccharide types and
include many glycans exclusive to microbes. In contrast, most major glycan
classes in animal cells seem to be represented in some related form among
other eukaryotes, and sometimes in Archaea. [Figure
20.1](/books/NBK453067/figure/ch20.f1/?report=objectonly) shows a circular
depiction of the phylogeny of life on earth. The rich glycan diversity
encountered in the best-studied vertebrate species suggests similar diversity
in other groups of organisms, and existing information points to complicated
patterns. On the one hand, glycan patterns can form “trends” and characterize
entire phylogenetic lineages, wherein one encounters further biochemical
variation with subsets unique to certain sublineages. On the other hand, many
glycans show discontinuous distribution across phyla and distantly related
organisms can express surprisingly similar glycans, using either shared
ancient pathways or convergently evolved mechanisms.

The most abundant biopolymers in nature include polysaccharides such as
cellulose, hemicellulose, chitin, and glycosaminoglycans. These large
chemically stable molecules provide crucial structural support for capsules,
cell walls, exoskeletons, and extracellular matrices of countless organisms.
The repeated β1-4 glycosidic linkages of cellulose and chitin also represent
extremely chemically resistant sequestrations of accumulated glycans, given
the inability of most organisms to hydrolyze these robust linkages.

The broadest base of evolutionary information concerns asparagine–N-linked
glycans, a “general” glycosylation system found in all domains of life
([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). In prokaryotes, protein N-glycosylation
takes place in the periplasm at the plasma membrane, whereas in eukaryotes,
covalent attachment of an oligosaccharide takes place intracellularly at the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, with the protein-bound glycan being
further processed in the ER and Golgi. Detailed studies of N-glycosylation
systems in model organisms reveal that the covalent modification of proteins
at asparagine side chains within the N-X-S/T sequon is a homologous process in
all taxa, characterized by certain common properties: nucleotide-activated
monosaccharides serve as building blocks for assembly of an oligosaccharide on
an isoprenoid lipid carrier in the cytoplasm. The lipid-linked oligosaccharide
is translocated across the ER membrane (eukaryotes) or the plasma membrane
(prokaryotes). In most eukaryotes, the lipid-linked oligosaccharide is
extended further before transfer to protein. Translocated proteins with
N-X-S/T consensus sequences can serve as acceptors for the
oligosaccharyltransferase, which catalyzes the en bloc transfer from the
lipid-linked precursor to the amido group of asparagine. The structural
diversity of the initially transferred oligosaccharide is highest in the
archaeal domain and lowest in eukaryotes. However, the protein-bound glycan is
further processed in the ER and in the Golgi compartments of eukaryotes,
generating greater structural diversity of glycans exposed at the cell
surface.

Analysis of N-glycosylation in model organisms from all three domains of life
offers the opportunity to visualize evolutionary trends and to propose
selective forces at work. Structural diversity of surface-exposed N-linked
glycans between populations and species is common, likely driven by an
evolutionary arms race due to exploitation of host glycans by parasites and
pathogens. The intracellular attachment of the oligosaccharide to proteins
that are in the process of folding is the basis for the role of highly defined
glycan structures in the modulation and the quality control of protein folding
in the ER ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). This intracellular function
of N-linked glycans is reflected in the high degree of conservation of the ER
pathway in eukaryotes: only some phylogenetically old protists are known to
transfer truncated forms of otherwise similar lipid-linked oligosaccharides.

In addition to structural diversity, significant quantitative evolution of
N-glycosylation is apparent. Because of the short N-X-S/T sequon in
polypeptides directing the oligosaccharyltransferase substrate, a general
modification system has evolved that affects many proteins, some with multiple
N-glycosylation sites. Analysis of the N-glycome reveals a correlation: there
are far fewer N-glycoproteins in unicellular than multicellular organisms.
Thus, N-glycan-mediated intrinsic cell–cell interaction likely forms a
selective force that leads to increased N-glycoprotein diversity with
multicellularity.

Newer analytical techniques ([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)) reveal ever-
increasing structural diversity of N-glycans in eukaryotes, arising from
remodeling in the ER and Golgi via variation in trimming, extension, and
branching by different building blocks. In addition, N-glycans can be modified
by phosphorylation, methylation, etc. There are evolutionary trends of
N-glycan processing in eukaryotes ([Figure
20.2](/books/NBK453067/figure/ch20.f2/?report=objectonly)). In fungi, trimming
is restricted to the quality control process of glycoprotein folding, and the
diversity of building blocks used for extension is limited. In contrast,
trimming to Man3GlcNAc2 is a characteristic of plants and animals.
Interestingly, each unit of this pentasaccharide can serve as a substrate for
branching and extension, but only animals seem to have branching from terminal
mannose residues, resulting in multiantennary complex-type N-glycans. In
contrast, modification of the β-linked mannose by xylose is a characteristic
of plants.

Lineage-specific N-glycosylation pathways are characterized by the presence or
absence of functional glycosyltransferases resulting in defined glycan
structures (e.g., LacdiNAc structures) and/or building blocks (e.g., sialic
acids). At the organismal level, N-glycan structures can be organ-, cell
type–, or sex-specific, because of differential expression of processing
enzymes. The common outer-chain Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-([ _N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/) or
“LacNAc”) is a prime example of phylogenetic variation of glycosyltransferase
machinery. The structure, frequent in invertebrates ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)), is also found in plants. Some plants even add
outer-chain Fucα1-3 residues to the GlcNAc residues of LacNAc units,
generating Lewis x–like structures identical to those in animal cells. In some
taxa, such as mollusks, an outer GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-structure (the so-called
LacDiNAc or LDN unit) tends to dominate, in place of the typical LacNAc
structure more commonly seen in vertebrates. The
SO4-4-GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-terminal units of pituitary glycoprotein hormones
([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)) are conserved throughout vertebrate
evolution, suggesting importance for biological activity.

With respect to monosaccharide building blocks, some appear restricted to
certain evolutionary lineages. Arabinose, rhamnose, and xylose are typical in
plants, but helminths share some of these monosaccharides. Many bacteria
produce monosaccharides bearing unique modifications absent from animals,
which in turn secrete defensive lectins (e.g., intelectin-1 or RegIIIa)
specific for these microbial glycans. Interestingly, although mammalian
glycans are assembled from a small number of different monosaccharide units,
microbial glycans consist of more than 700 different building blocks. Although
more data are needed to be certain, there appears to be a general trend toward
reduction of glycan complexity in more recently evolved multicellular taxa
with multiple internal organ systems.

[Sialic acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) are prominent at the
outer termini of N-glycans, O-glycans, and glycosphingolipids of deuterostomes
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). They were once thought to be an
evolutionary innovation unique to this lineage, which originated during the
Cambrian Expansion, and other scattered reports of sialic acids in a few other
taxa were thought to reflect lateral gene transfer and/or convergent evolution
(i.e., independent evolution of sialic acid synthesis in these taxa). However,
although lateral transfer mechanisms exist and may explain the presence of
sialic acids in some bacterial taxa, sialic acids are also reported in some
fungi and mollusks. Together with evidence for a limited set of genes for
their production and addition in some protostomes (e.g., in insects such as
Drosophila or mollusks such as _Octopus_ ), the situation is indicative of an
earlier evolutionary origin for sialic acids. _Caenorhabditis elegans_ , the
free-living nematode, does not contain genes for synthesizing or metabolizing
sialic acid. Prior claims for sialic acids in plants are probably due to
environmental contamination and/or incorrect identification of the chemically
related sugar Kdo (3-deoxy-octulosonic acid). However, sialic acid
biosynthetic genes of some insect and bacterial species share homology with
those of vertebrates. It is also now evident that sialic acids are an
invention derived from genes of more ancient pathways for nonulosonic acid
(NulO) synthesis ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). In this scenario,
NulOs were differentially exploited during evolution, becoming prominent as
sialic acids only in the deuterostome lineage, while being abandoned or
substantially reduced in complexity and/or biological importance in other
animal and fungal taxa. Sialic acids also appear to contribute to self-
associated molecular patterns (SAMPs) in vertebrates, which have immune-
modulating intrinsic sialic acid–binding lectins (like
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/)). Meanwhile, a variety of
bacteria synthesize sialic acid–like molecules using the ancestral NulO
biosynthetic pathway ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). It is curious that
invertebrates, such as echinoderms (sea urchins and starfish) have the highest
sialic acid diversity in deuterostomes and the simplest profiles are found in
humans. Thus, sialic acids seem to have evolved in many possible directions,
disappearing altogether, or undergoing complication or simplification of their
structures. Although there is a tendency for some types of sialic acids to be
dominant in certain mammalian species (e.g., _N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid in
pigs and 4-O-acetylated sialic acids in horses), careful investigation reveals
lower quantities of such sialic acids in many other species. Notably, humans
are “knockout” primates for CMP–Neu5Ac hydroxylase (CMAH). Thus, unlike the
closely related great apes, humans are deficient in the sialic acid Neu5Gc
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). Chickens also respond immunologically
against Neu5Gc, and it appears that sauropsids (birds and reptiles,
descendants of dinosaurs) represent another lineage that lost Neu5Gc. More
recently, independent loss of function of _CMAH_ has been documented for other
mammalian lineages, including New World primates, and also ferrets and other
_Mustelids_ as well as seals and sea lions ( _Pinnipeds)_.

Homologs of the UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases
(ppGalNAcTs) initiating synthesis of the most common O-glycan class in
vertebrates have been found throughout the animal kingdom ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). Multiple isoforms of ppGalNAcTs exist, with
different polypeptide substrate specificity. The common Core-1
Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-O-Ser/Thr structure of vertebrates exists in insects, where it
also forms part of a mucin-like protective layer in the gut. It appears that
heavily O-glycosylated gel-forming mucins have been recruited and diversified
in metazoans to mediate lubrication and protection of hydrated epithelia in
direct contact with the environment. In contrast, plants do not appear to have
O-linked GalNAc. Instead, they express arabinose O-linked to hydroxyproline
and galactose O-linked to serine and threonine ([Chapter
24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). Far less is known about bacterial
O-glycosylation, although novel O-glycans can be found within bacterial “S”
layers or cellular appendages (e.g., Galβ1-O-Tyr) ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)).

Glucosylceramide is found in both plants and animals ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). However, the most common core structure of
vertebrate glycosphingolipids (Galβ1-4Glc-Cer) is varied in other organisms,
for example, Manβ1-4Glc-Cer and GlcNAcβ1-4Glc-Cer in certain invertebrates.
Another variation is inositol-1- _O_ -phosphorylceramide, for example,
mannosyldiinositolphosphorylceramide, the most abundant sphingolipid of yeast,
and GlcNAcα1-4GlcAα1-2- _myo_ -inositol-1- _O_ -phosphorylceramide, found in
tobacco leaves. Galactosylceramide and its derivatives seem to be limited to
the nervous system of the deuterostome lineage of animals. In contrast,
protostome nerves contain mainly glucosylceramides. An evolutionary trend is
suggested: a transition from gluco- to galactoceramides corresponds with
changes in the nervous system from loosely structured to highly structured
myelin. Regarding complex gangliosides of the deuterostome nervous system,
some general trends are seen in comparing reptiles and fish to mammals: an
increase in sialic acid content, a decrease in complexity, and a decrease in
“alkali-labile” gangliosides (bearing O-acetylated sialic acids). The lower
the temperature, the more polar the composition of brain gangliosides;
poikilothermic (cold-blooded) animals tend to express many polysialylated
gangliosides in the brain.

Heparan and chondroitin sulfate are found in many animal taxa, including
insects ([Chapter 26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)) and mollusks. The most widely
distributed and evolutionarily ancient class appears to be chondroitin chains,
which are not always sulfated (e.g., in _C. elegans_ ) ([Chapter
25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)). The more highly sulfated and epimerized forms of
heparin and dermatan sulfate tend to be found primarily in more recently
evolved animal species of the deuterostome lineage. The same is true of
hyaluronan, a secreted free glycosaminoglycan that may have evolved from its
likely precursor chitin to facilitate the movement of metazoan cells during
development and normal physiology. Echinoderms such as the sea cucumber make
typical chondroitin chains, but some glucuronic acids have branches containing
fucose sulfate. Simpler multicellular animals such as sponges can have unusual
glycosaminoglycans that include uronic acids but do not have the typical
repeat units of chondroitin and heparan sulfate. Plants do not have typical
animal glycosaminoglycans. Instead, they have acidic pectin polysaccharides,
characterized by galacturonic acid and its methyl ester derivative ([Chapter
24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). Bacteria have completely distinct polysaccharides
([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)), although certain pathogenic strains can
mimic mammalian glycosaminoglycan chains (see below).

The O-β-GlcNAc modification common on cytoplasmic, mitochondrial, and nuclear
proteins ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)) is widely expressed in “higher”
animals and in plants, and its occurrence on histone tails implicates this
modification in epigenetic regulation mechanisms. The connections between
nutrient state, UDP-GlcNAc levels, and
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) mean that gene
regulation has an important metabolic dimension. Conserved homologs of the
responsible O-GlcNAc transferase have been found in many eukaryotic taxa and
in a wide range of bacteria. Most interestingly, in some animal pathogenic
members of Pasteurellaceae and Enterobacteriaceae, homologs of the O-GlcNAc
transferase catalyze a cytoplasmic N-glycosylation within N-X-S/T sequons of
adhesins. [Molecular mimicry](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/molecularmimicry/)
of eukaryotic N-glycoproteins might be the driving force for this convergent
evolution of an N-glycosylation system.

Viruses typically have minimalist genomes and use host-cell machinery. Thus,
glycosylation of enveloped viruses reflects that of the host. However, there
are exceptions, such as a chlorella virus glycoprotein PBCV-1 modified by a
“[Fringe](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/fringe/)-type” viral
glycosyltransferase, baculovirus glycosyltransferases that glycosylate insect
host ecdysteroids to block molting, and giant Mimivirus glycosyltransferases.
Host-derived glycosylation in enveloped viruses is typically extensive and
protects the virus from immune reactions against the underlying polypeptide.
In this regard, it has been suggested that the high frequency of heterozygous
states for human congenital disorders of glycosylation ([Chapter
44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)) may reflect selection for genomes that limit
glycosylation of invading viruses. Host lectins may also be “hijacked” by
glycans on viral surface glycoproteins. For example, Sialoadhesin (Siglec-1;
[Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) is used by the heavily sialylated porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus to gain entry into macrophages.
Viral protein sequence can also influence host glycosylation in a manner that
favors viral antigenicity, such as the high-mannose N-glycans on HIV-1
envelope gp120 trimers.

Despite the enormous potential for structural diversity, a rather limited
subset of all possible monosaccharides and their possible linkages and
modifications are found in eukaryotic cells. Why one encounters only such a
limited subset of the possible glycan structures is a puzzling question. Could
there be a trade-off between total number of monosaccharide structures used
and multicellularity/longevity? Regardless, this limited subset has allowed
better elucidation of structures of eukaryotic glycans. In contrast, Bacteria
and Archaea have had several billion additional years to respond to selective
pressure from pathogens; in particular, phages. These organisms also have
short generation times and can exchange genetic material across vast
phylogenetic distances via plasmid-mediated horizontal gene flow.
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) in Bacteria and
Archaea is far more diverse, both in terms of the range of monosaccharides
used or synthesized and the types of linkages and modifications ([Chapters
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)). In addition,
prokaryotic cell–cell interactions both within and between species are often
mediated by glycans. However, most work to date has focused on the glycans of
pathogens, and we may have barely scratched the surface of prokaryotic glycan
diversity.

Despite great differences between pathways generating glycan structures of
bacteria and those of vertebrates, occasional microbial surface structures are
strikingly similar to those of mammalian cells. Interestingly, most such
examples of “molecular mimicry” occur in pathogenic/symbiotic microorganisms,
apparently adapting them for better survival in the host by avoiding,
reducing, or manipulating host immunity. A few examples include _Escherichia
coli_ K1 and Meningococcus group B (polysialic acid), _E. coli_ K5 (heparosan,
heparan sulfate backbone), Group A Streptococcus (hyaluronan), Group B
Streptococcus (sialylated _N_ -acetyllactosamines), and _Campylobacter jejuni_
(ganglioside-like glycans). Initially, it was thought that the responsible
microbial genes arose via lateral gene transfer from eukaryotes. However, in
all instances in which genetic information is available, evidence points
toward convergent evolution rather than gene transfer. For example, genes
synthesizing sialic acids in bacteria seem to have been derived from
preexisting prokaryotic pathways for nonulosonic acids, an ancestral family of
monosaccharides with a structural resemblance. In contrast, bacterial
sialyltransferases bear little resemblance to those of eukaryotes, and the
vast sequence differences between different bacterial sialyltransferases
indicate that these have even been reinvented on several separate occasions.
Of course, lateral gene transfer is common among Bacteria and Archaea,
facilitating rapid phylogenetic dissemination of such enzymatic “inventions.”

Why do closely related species differ with regard to the presence or absence
of certain glycans? Does the same glycoprotein have the same type of
glycosylation in distinct but related species? Relatively little data exist
regarding these issues, but examples of both extreme conservation and
diversification are found. A reasonable explanation is that conservation of
glycan structure reflects specific functional constraints for the glycans in
question. In other instances, considerable drift in details of glycan
structure might be tolerated, as long as the underlying protein is able to
carry out its primary functions (changes with no consequences for survival or
reproduction, i.e., those that are selectively neutral). Even in the absence
of important endogenous functions, glycans can have key roles in mediating
interactions with symbionts and pathogens. The evolution of diversity and
microheterogeneity (across tissues and cell types) in glycosylation could well
be of value to the organisms in providing additional obstacles to pathogens
that use host glycans for attachment and entry. Free glycans (e.g., milk
oligosaccharides) can also have important roles in attracting and feeding
symbiont microbial communities needed for internal functions and in
accommodating or restricting these to particular areas of the host.

There can even be significant variation in glycosylation among members of the
same species, particularly in terminal glycan sequences. The classic example
is the ABH(O) histo-blood group system ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)),
a polymorphism found in all human populations, which has also persisted for
tens of millions of years of primate evolution and has even been independently
rederived in some instances. Despite its clinical importance for blood
transfusion, this polymorphism appears to cause no major differences to the
intrinsic biology of individuals of the species ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Like other blood groups, the
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) polymorphism is accompanied by
production of antibodies against the variants absent from an individual. These
antibodies may be protective by causing complement-mediated lysis of enveloped
viruses generated within other individuals who express the target structure.
Thus, an enveloped virus generated in a B blood group individual might be
susceptible to complement-mediated lysis on contact with an A or O blood group
individual who has circulating anti-B antibodies. Experimental evidence
supports such a mechanism. However, this selection mechanism alone should
strongly favor O individuals who form antibodies against the A and B variants,
while not bearing an antigenic variant themselves, and should lead to higher
frequencies of O type than are observed. Recent evidence for ABO type– and
subtype–specific noroviruses provides a potential explanation for the
persistence of intermediate frequencies in most populations.

Another explanation for interspecies diversity is selection exerted by
pathogens that recognize glycans as targets for attachment and entry into
cells. This mechanism is likely operative in generating the extreme diversity
of sialic acid types and linkages ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).
Recent analyses have tried to combine the two mechanisms: the antibody-
mediated protection from intracellular but enveloped viruses and possible
frequency-dependent protection from glycan-exploiting extracellular pathogens,
such as Noro- and Rotaviruses and _Plasmodium falciparum_ ( _P. falciparum_ )
(causative agent of malignant malaria). Modeling approaches have successfully
generated observed frequencies of [ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) by
incorporating these two simultaneous selection pressures. The evolutionary
persistence of the ABO system needs further explanation.

Another unexplained phenomenon is genetic inactivation in Old World primates
of the ability to synthesize the otherwise very common terminal
Galα1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R structure ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). This
variation is also associated with spontaneously appearing and persistently
circulating antibodies against the missing glycan determinant, thus forming a
kind of “interspecies blood group.” This glycan difference may also be
protective for the primate lineage which lost “α Gal” and has a high-titer
circulating antibody, as it is now better protected against infection by
enveloped viruses emanating from other mammals. Independent losses of the
vertebrate-specific sialic acid Neu5Gc in humans and some other mammalian
clades is a further example of glycan evolution by loss of function ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). In the process, these lineages have lost a potent
signal of self, given the apparent inability of any microbe to synthesize this
glycan.

Regardless of the mechanisms maintaining these types of polymorphisms, such
intra- and interspecies diversity might also provide for “herd immunity,” a
phenomenon whereby one glycan variant–resistant individual can indirectly
protect other susceptible individuals by restricting the spread of a pathogen
through the population. Such proposed protective functions of glycan diversity
are only apparent at the level of populations. This complicates their study in
model organisms in which the focus is classically on the individual. It is
important to point out here that evolution itself is a process that occurs at
the level of populations.

Future studies will have to test precisely how much inter- and intraspecies
glycan variation is directly driven by host–pathogen interactions. Although
glycan variation forms an important determinant of host susceptibility,
variation on target tissues as well as defensive secretions (mucins) must be
considered when trying to understand disease, especially epidemics or
zoonotics involving different host species and their interactions (e.g.,
influenza A) ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). Finally, recent evidence
suggests that antibodies against glycans absent in a subset of females in an
extant species might aid in speciation via the killing of sperm from the
remaining males in the population still bearing the glycan.

For obvious reasons, the most detailed information about glycan structures is
available about various popular model organisms as well as certain well-
studied pathogens, and useful comparative knowledge can be gleaned from the
relevant chapters that follow in this part of the book. But we must be careful
about extrapolating data from organisms long maintained under optimal
laboratory conditions to the overall taxa that they represent. The realization
that rodents are the closest evolutionary cousins to primates has provided
added justification for their use to understand human disease. However, Nobel
laureate Sydney Brenner suggests there is now enough information about humans
to consider ourselves to be the “next model organism.” Indeed, there is an
increasing tendency to focus tractable questions about glycans and their
biology directly on humans, including naturally occurring mutations.

It was once popular to suggest that every glycan on every cell type must have
a critical intrinsic host function. Analysis of data on glycosyltransferase-
deficient mice suggests that this is not the case. For example, ST6Gal-I α2-6
sialyltransferase is the main enzyme that produces Siaα2-6Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-
termini on vertebrate glycans. Although this sequence serves as a specific
ligand for the B-cell regulatory molecule CD22 (Siglec-2; [Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)), it is also found on many other cell types, as
well as on many soluble secreted glycoproteins. Furthermore, ST6Gal-I mRNA
varies markedly among cell types, and its transcription is regulated by
several cell type–specific promoters, which are in turn modulated by hormones
and cytokines. Despite these data, the prominent consequences of eliminating
its expression in mice so far seem to be restricted to the immune and
hematopoietic systems and some cell adhesion, apoptosis, and oncogenic
pathways. If the specific intrinsic functions of the ST6Gal-I glycan product
are in fact restricted to some systems, why is it expressed in so many other
locations? And why up-regulate its expression so markedly in the liver and
endothelium during a so-called “acute phase” inflammatory response? Besides
feedback on the immune system, could it be that scattered expression of this
structure in other locations functions as a “smoke screen” or temporary
“firewall,” restricting intraorganismal spread of an invading pathogen? Could
it also be that heavily glycosylated nonnucleated cells like erythrocytes act
as “decoy traps” for viral pathogens that require nucleated cells for
replication? Answers to these questions must take into account the
evolutionary selection pressures (both intrinsic and extrinsic recognition
phenomena such as host–pathogen interactions and innate immune contributions)
on glycosyltransferase products. Many effects may also not be apparent in
inbred genetically modified mice living in hygienic vivaria, requiring studies
in a natural, pathogen-rich environment. It is also possible that other gene
products are masking phenotypes in these model systems, compensating for the
loss. Furthermore, it is likely we have not looked hard enough at such
genetically modified mice nor applied the relevant environmental pressures to
elicit phenotypes.

Based on available data, it is reasonable to suggest that the evolution of
glycan diversification in complex multicellular organisms has been driven by
selection pressures of both intrinsic and extrinsic origin relative to the
organism under study ([Chapter 7](/books/n/glyco3/ch7/)).
[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) evolution is expected to be
under selective constraints; that is, opposing selective forces influencing
their course of evolution. Given their important role in definition of the
molecular frontier of cells and organisms, the same glycan can come under
opposing selective pressures at different times in the life of a cell or
organism. Glycans favoring cell motility (e.g., polysialic acid) will be
favored for development but become detrimental when exploited by malignant
cells. Glycans on reproductive tract secretions favoring survival of sperm
(e.g., Glycodelin S) might be counterselected in females who benefit from a
different glycan form (Glycodelin A), which challenges male gametes as part of
female quality control. Unique glycans evolved as reliable SAMPs can become a
liability if exploited by pathogens through molecular mimicry. Glycans are
also particularly susceptible to the “Red Queen” effect, in which host glycans
must keep changing to stay ahead of the pathogens, which have more rapid
evolutionary rates because of their short generation times, high mutation
rates, and rampant horizontal gene transfer. Given the rapid evolution of
extrinsic pathogens and their frequent use of glycans as targets for host
recognition, it seems likely that a significant portion of the overall
diversity in vertebrate cell-surface glycan structure reflects such pathogen-
mediated selection processes. Meanwhile, even one critical intrinsic role of a
glycan would disallow its elimination as a mechanism to evade pathogens. Thus,
glycan expression patterns may represent trade-offs between evading pathogens
and preserving intrinsic functions.

More gene disruption studies in intact animals could help differentiate
intrinsic and extrinsic glycan functions. More systematic comparative
glycobiology could also contribute, making predictions about intrinsic glycan
function; that is, the consistent (conserved) expression of the same structure
in the same cell type across several taxa would imply a critical intrinsic
role. Such work might also help define the rate of glycan diversification
during evolution, better define the relative roles of the intrinsic and
extrinsic selective forces, and eventually lead to a better understanding of
the functional significance of glycan diversification during evolution. The
possibility that pathogen-driven glycan diversification might even favor the
process of sympatric speciation (via reproductive isolation) also needs to be
further explored.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from David B. Nix and
Jeremy O'Sullivan.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.021

Most bacterial glycans are associated with the cell envelopes and many provide
the immediate point of contact with the environment. As a result, they
contribute to the essential permeability barrier properties of the cell
envelope, they play pivotal roles in protecting pathogenic bacteria from host
defenses, they are important in symbioses, and they provide receptors for
bacteriophages. Reflecting selective pressures imparted by these interactions,
the structures of bacterial glycoconjugates are remarkably diverse with
extensive variations between species and even within isolates of the same
species.

Many bacterial glycoconjugates are associated with the cell envelope and cell
surfaces, and some are essential for viability. They show a wide diversity in
structures and often feature sugars not found elsewhere in nature. Surface
glycoconjugates drive a variety of important interactions with elements of the
host innate and adaptive immune defenses. Some serve as pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) that are recognized via Toll-like receptor (TLR)
pathways, whereas others have been exploited for successful vaccine
strategies. These structures also contribute to resistance to harmful
compounds (e.g., antibiotics) and are often attributed roles in protecting
cells against host defenses. Surface glycoconjugates are typically receptors
for highly specific bacteriophages and thus may also have an important role in
facilitating horizontal gene transfer.

Bacteria were historically divided into two major groups based on their
response in the Gram-staining procedure (i.e., Gram-positive and Gram-negative
organisms), which depends on the nature of the cell wall. In Gram-negative
bacteria, such as _Escherichia coli_ , the cell wall consists of inner and
outer membranes separated by a cellular compartment termed the periplasm
([Figure 21.1](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f1/?report=objectonly)). The
peptidoglycan layer is located in the periplasm and constitutes the major
structural component of the periplasm. It consists of polysaccharide strands
covalently cross-linked by short peptides and confers cell shape and rigidity
to the cell. The periplasm of Gram-negative bacteria contains proteins
associated with cell-surface assembly and nutrient uptake but may also contain
a range of free oligosaccharides that help protect against osmotic stress. The
outer membrane is an asymmetric lipid bilayer, with an outer leaflet composed
mainly of a unique glycolipid called lipopolysaccharide (LPS) that is
essential for the integrity of the permeability barrier imposed by the outer
membrane. Many Gram-negative bacteria are covered in a surface-bound
polysaccharide layer known as the capsule and in some cases this capsular
polysaccharide (CPS) is released from the cell in large amounts as free
exopolysaccharide (EPS). Bacteria with these products are often readily
identified by their highly mucoid colonies.

Gram-positive bacteria lack the outer membrane ([Figure
21.1](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f1/?report=objectonly)) and depend on a
much thicker multilayered peptidoglycan layer for viability. The Gram-positive
cell wall is modified with additional specialized cell wall glycan polymers
that can be covalently linked to peptidoglycan (as wall teichoic acids
[WTAs]), or anchored in the cell membrane in the case of glycolipids such as
lipoteichoic acids (LTAs). Mycobacteria and related Actinobacteria are not
considered to be Gram-positive or Gram-negative, and are instead classified as
acid-fast bacteria because they possess distinctive cell walls that confer an
aberrant response to the classical Gram-staining procedure. Their complex cell
walls have a high content of remarkable glycan and glycolipid structures
([Figure 21.1](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f1/?report=objectonly)). The
unique arabinogalactan (AG) component that characterizes these organisms is
covalently attached to peptidoglycan and provides an attachment point for
characteristic long-chain (C60–C90) α-alkyl-β-hydroxymycolic acids. The
resulting mycolyl-AG-peptidoglycan complex underpins a permeability barrier
conferring resistance to antibiotics and other harmful molecules. Mycolic
acids help form an envelope layer referred to as an “outer membrane,” although
its structure shares no similarity with its namesake in Gram-negative
bacteria.

[Peptidoglycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/peptidoglycan/) (also known as
murein) forms a rigid sacculus enveloping the cytoplasmic membrane, conferring
cell shape and contributing to the ability of bacteria to resist the effects
of internal osmotic (turgor) pressure. Peptidoglycan is therefore essential
for the viability of most bacteria. Given its distribution, peptidoglycan is
recognized by host defenses as a marker of infection. Released peptidoglycan
is a PAMP recognized by TLR2 and pattern recognition proteins such as
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs), to
activate an inflammatory response as part of innate immunity.

[Peptidoglycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/peptidoglycan/) makes up ∼10% of
the dry weight of the cell wall in Gram-negative bacteria, where it exists in
a structure one to three layers thick. In contrast, Gram-positive bacteria
have a thicker cell wall containing 10 to 20 layers of peptidoglycan,
representing as much as 20%–25% of the dry weight of the cell. The overall
chemical structure of peptidoglycan is similar across bacterial genera
([Figure 21.2](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f2/?report=objectonly)). It
consists of parallel strands of polysaccharide composed of a β1-4-linked
disaccharide of _N_ -acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and _N_ -acetylmuramic acid
(MurNAc). The average chain length of the glycan strands in _E. coli_ is 25–35
disaccharide units but may increase severalfold in Gram-positive bacteria.
Adjacent strands are connected to one another via cross-links between short
peptide strands attached to the MurNAc residues ([Figure
21.2](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f2/?report=objectonly)). Individual glycan
strands are thought to be arranged parallel to the membrane and the helical
conformation of the glycan strands enables cross-linking in three dimensions,
within and between layers, to create the functional higher-order structure.
Although the amino acid composition varies in different bacteria, the peptides
are typically composed of L-Ala, unusual D-amino acids (e.g., D-Glu and
D-Ala), and a dibasic amino acid such as _meso_ -diaminopimelic acid ( _m_
-A2pm or _m_ -DAP) or L-Lys, to facilitate the cross-linking. Cross-links may
be direct peptide bonds or (in some Gram-positive bacteria) include several
amino acids, such as Gly5. This, and the frequency of cross-linking, will have
spatial implications for the final meshwork. Variations in peptidoglycan
structure may occur within the same organism at different stages of the cell
cycle, during developmental processes, or at different sites in the same cell.

A characteristic property of many Gram-positive cell walls is the attachment
of secondary cell wall polymers to MurNAc residues in the glycan backbone. In
addition, the dibasic amino acid provides a potential site for protein
attachment. Sortase-family enzymes link a wide range of proteins (including
pili, surface-layer [S-layer] subunits, and metabolite-binding proteins) to
the cell wall. In Gram-negative bacteria, outer membrane lipoproteins are
attached to this site in peptidoglycan.

Despite its role in cell integrity, peptidoglycan is a dynamic structure,
allowing insertion of new material during rapid cell growth and division, as
well as accommodating the assembly of macromolecular stuctures (e.g., flagella
and protein secretion systems), which pass through the cell wall. As a result,
peptidoglycan undergoes ∼50% turnover every generation catalyzed by a
collection of peptidoglycan hydrolases (glycosidases, peptidases, and
amidases). An imbalance in the metabolism of peptidoglycan can lead to a rapid
loss of cell wall integrity, followed by osmotic swelling and cell lysis. Such
effects underpin the actions of cell wall active antibiotics (described below)
and the effect of lysozyme, an enzyme secreted by leukocytes as part of innate
immunity.

[Peptidoglycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/peptidoglycan/) synthesis
involves a complex series of well-conserved enzymatic reactions located in
three cellular compartments ([Figure
21.2](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f2/?report=objectonly)). In the initial
stage, activated nucleotide precursors are synthesized in the cytoplasm. UDP-
MurNAc is generated through the condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) with
UDP-GlcNAc and subsequent reduction. In some mycobacteria UDP-MurNAc is
hydroxylated into UDP-MurNGc for unknown reasons, generating the only other
known N-glycoyl group in nature, besides _N_ -glycoylneuraminic acid, which is
exclusive to deuterostomes ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). Sequential
addition of the amino acids by specific ATP-dependent amino acid ligases leads
to the formation of the UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide. The disaccharide repeat unit
is built on a C55 polyprenol carrier (undecaprenol or bactoprenol phosphate)
in the cytoplasmic membrane in a process resembling the early stage of
eukaryotic N-linked glycan formation ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). The
resulting lipid-linked disaccharide subunit (lipid II) is flipped across the
membrane mainly by MurJ, although other flippases may also participate in some
circumstances. Lipid II is polymerized at the periplasmic face of the membrane
and new glycans are inserted into the growing cell wall. This requires
glycosyltransferases (GTs) to extend the glycan backbones and transpeptidases
(TPs), also known as penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) to catalyze cross-
linking. Each organism possesses multiple GT and TP activities, existing as
monofunctional enzymes or as bifunctional GT-TPs, and structures of key
enzymes have provided insight into their mechanisms. GTs mediate stepwise
assembly of the glycan using a molecule of lipid II as the acceptor and
releasing one undecaprenyl diphosphate in each cycle.

The TP and GT reactions are context-dependent; different enzyme combinations
are coupled with peptidoglycan remodeling enzymes in complexes that are guided
by cytoskeletal elements (actin and tubulin homologs) to achieve wall
elongation or cell division. The latter is particularly complex with a
multiprotein “divisome” dedicated to fidelity in the timing and placement of
the division site. Among the remodeling enzymes are lytic transglycosylases
cleaving glycan chains to create a characteristic terminal 1,6-anhydroMurNAc
residue. This reaction may determine the size of the glycan chains
(effectively marking the end of biosynthesis) but is also required for the
insertion of _trans_ –cell wall structures, signaling in the regulation of
some β-lactamases, and the release of PAMPs.

[Peptidoglycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/peptidoglycan/) synthesis has
offered a classic target for antibiotics and continues to provide new avenues
for drug discovery. Penicillins and other β-lactam antibiotics mimic the
D-Ala-D-Ala motif and create a slow-turnover acyl-enzyme complex with TPs
(hence the PBP name). Resistance to these compounds involves their exclusion
from the cell, replacement of the target enzyme, or production of
β-lactamases. Vancomycin and other glycopeptides also affect the cross-linking
step but they bind to the terminal D-Ala-D-Ala to prevent its turnover.
Members of the moenomycin family of compounds are phosphoglycolipids that are
thought to inhibit transglycosylase GTs by mimicking the growing glycan chain
and binding the donor substrate site in the enzyme. The points of action of
these and other antibacterial compounds are shown in [Figure
21.2](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f2/?report=objectonly).

Gram-positive cell walls contain large amounts of additional polymers that
provide further functionality and structure to the cell wall. The best known
examples are WTAs, which typically consist of polyribitol or polyglycerol
chains (40–60 repeats) variably substituted with monosaccharides and/or D-Ala.
These chains are linked by a phosphodiester bond to the C6 position of MurNAc
through a conserved linkage region ([Figure
21.3](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f3/?report=objectonly)). WTAs extend
through and beyond the peptidoglycan layers and are exposed at the cell
surface. They are expendable for viability in the laboratory, but they are
required for pathogenicity and presumably for growth in other environments. A
wide range of functions are (directly or indirectly) attributed to WTAs
including regulation of peptidoglycan remodeling, cell wall growth and
morphology, binding divalent cations, adhesion, biofilm formation, resistance
to innate immunity (lysozyme and antimicrobial peptides), as well as
resistance to antibiotics and other environmental stresses. WTAs also provide
a means of tethering some proteins, including S-layers to the cell surface.
Under conditions of phosphate starvation, some bacteria replace the phosphate-
rich WTAs by teichuronic acids, where carboxyl groups create their anionic
character ([Figure 21.3](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f3/?report=objectonly)).

WTAs are synthesized from nucleotide-activated precursors on undecaprenyl
carriers and, once complete, they are exported across the cytoplasmic membrane
by an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter and attached to MurNAc acceptors.
The timing (during peptidoglycan assembly) and location of WTA insertion is
not fully resolved.

LTAs are also commonly found in Gram-positive cell walls. Some LTAs may
possess similar carbohydrate structures to WTAs ([Figure
21.3](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f3/?report=objectonly)), but others are
substantially more complex. They are attached to membrane anchor glycolipids
that vary in sugar composition but typically contain terminal diacylglycerol
(DAG). The assembly pathways of WTAs and LTAs are quite different. For
example, the prevalent polyglycerol-based LTAs require phosphatidylglycerol as
the glycerol donor, rather than a nucleotide-activated precursor seen in WTA
synthesis, and LTAs are assembled on the DAG-containing glycolipid without the
participation of undecaprenyl phosphate. LTAs may coexist with WTAs, and some
of their proposed functions overlap, but LTAs may have particular importance
in those bacteria that do not contain teichoic acids. Mutations eliminating
both LTA and WTA synthesis show synthetic lethality. LTAs have also been
implicated in inflammatory responses and are proposed as ligands for a range
of host receptors, although information concerning their status as PAMPs
recognized by TLR2 is contradictory.

Pathogenic mycobacteria, including the organisms that cause tuberculosis and
leprosy, are intracellular parasites that replicate within modified phagosomes
of macrophages. Mycobacteria are also able to enter a dormant (metabolically
inactive) state aiding in persistence. These properties are critically
dependent on a remarkable cell envelope architecture containing a wide array
of unusual cell wall constituents ([Figure
21.1](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f1/?report=objectonly)). AG is crucial to
the integrity of the cell wall and the organism's resistance to many
antibiotics. AG is anchored to approximately one in every 10 disaccharides in
a peptidoglycan strand, in a similar way to WTAs ([Figure
21.3](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f3/?report=objectonly)). The main
carbohydrate poly-Gal _f_ backbone of AG is synthesized on a decaprenyl-P
carrier in a process resembling some LPS O-antigens (see below) before its
export to the periplasm by an unidentified transporter. Elaboration of the
arabinofuran is performed in the periplasm, using decaprenyl-P-Ara _f_ as the
immediate donor. After ligation to peptidoglycan, the reducing terminal Ara
_f_ residues provide attachment sites for the characteristic mycolic acids.
The lipids form a major part of the mycobacterial outer membrane ([Figure
21.1](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f1/?report=objectonly)). This unusual outer
membrane offers a formidable barrier against antibiotics and harmful
compounds. The essential role of the mycolyl-AG-peptidoglycan complex in
mycobacterial physiology makes it an attractive target for drug discovery.
Indeed, the front-line drug ethambutol is a structural analog inhibitor of
arabinosyl GTs.

The cell envelope also contains a wide range of bioactive glycolipids.
Abundant examples are based on a core structure of phosphatidylinositol
mannosides (PIMs), with varying acylation and glycan lengths. PIMs and PI can
account for more than 50% of the total envelope phospholipid content and are
important for cell wall integrity and division. After synthesis and export,
these lipids are extended into lipomannans (LMs) by additions from decaprenyl-
P-Man donors. They can then be further elaborated into lipoarabinomannans
(LAMs) using decaprenyl-P-Ara _f_ , creating a covalently linked arabinan
resembling the structure in AG, in a LAM molecule containing more than 100
sugars ([Figure 21.3](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f3/?report=objectonly)).
The terminal Ara _f_ residues can be further capped by Man residues in ManLAM.
These compounds are all potentially recognized by adaptive immune response, by
the mannose receptor on macrophages (facilitating phagocytosis), and by DC-
SIGN (dendritic cell–specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing
nonintegrin). ManLAM and (particularly) LM are potent ligands for TLR2 but
differ in their immunomodulatory effects, and their exact role(s) in the
complex pathogenesis process is still unresolved.

The outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria ([Figure
21.1](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f1/?report=objectonly)) is an asymmetric
bilayer, where the outer leaflet that is mostly composed of the unique
glycolipid known as LPS (see [Figure
21.5](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f5/?report=objectonly)). LPS is absent only
in a few endosymbionts such as _Borrelia_ and _Wolbachia_ species and in
_Sphingomonas_ , in which LPS is functionally replaced by sphingolipids. In
_Salmonella_ there are ∼106 molecules of LPS per cell (vs. 107 total
phospholipids), covering ∼75% of the cell surface. LPS is usually essential
for outer membrane integrity in producing organisms, but a few species (e.g.,
_Neisseria meningitidis_ and _Acinetobacter baumannii_ ) are able to survive
in the face of mutations that prevent LPS synthesis, although this imparts a
cost on fitness and virulence. Much of our knowledge of structure, synthesis,
and functions of the molecule arises from work in _E. coli_ and _Salmonella_ ,
but the general principles are widely applicable. LPS consists of three
structural domains: lipid A, core oligosaccharide, and the O-antigen
polysaccharide ([Figure
21.4](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Lipid A is a glycolipid containing a variable number of fatty acyl chains
covalently attached directly to a disaccharide backbone that serves to anchor
LPS in the outer membrane. The most common lipid-A structure consists of a
β1-6-linked diglucosamine backbone. In _E. coli_ , the reducing terminal sugar
contains phosphate at C-1 and ester- and amide-linked β-hydroxymyristic acid
residues at C-3 and C-2, respectively ([Figure
21.4](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f4/?report=objectonly)). The second
glucosamine residue also contains phosphate at C-4′ and two β-hydroxymyristic
acids, in ester linkage at C-3′ and amide linkage at C-2′, with additional
lauroyl groups on the β-hydroxyls. LPS was first discovered in the late 1800s
as a heat-stable toxin associated with bacteria, and chemical synthesis of _E.
coli_ lipid A in 1985 confirmed that this moiety is responsible for the
biological (endotoxic) properties of LPS in mammals, resulting in fever,
septic shock, and other deleterious physiological effects ([Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Lipid A is a PAMP and when released from the cell
surface into the circulation, it provides a ligand for the TLR4/myeloid
differentiation factor 2 (MD2) receptor of the innate immune system. This
triggers the secretion of proinflammatory mediators by monocytes and
macrophages. Low levels of cytokine induction provide beneficial stimulation
of the adaptive immune response and one variant monophosphoryl lipid A (MPL)
is a licensed adjuvant. However, in high levels, it causes morbidity and
mortality. These different outcomes are dictated by lipid-A structure
(phosphorylation and acylation), which vary considerably among Gram-negative
bacteria, and cause altered signaling downstream from TLR4/MD2.

Free lipid A occurs in a few rare exceptions (e.g., _Francisella novicida_ )
because, in most bacteria, lipid A is modified by sugars forming the core
oligosaccharide. This branched oligosaccharide is conceptually separated into
a more variable outer core that provides an attachment point for the
O-antigen, whereas the inner core is more conserved. All lipid-A molecules
contain one to four units of the unusual eight-carbon sugar, Kdo (3-deoxy-D-
_manno_ -oct-2-ulosonic acid [or a derivative thereof]), located at the
linkage region between lipid A and core, and L (or D) -glycero- _manno_
-heptose residues are found in many inner cores. Negatively charged elements,
in the inner core such as phosphates and uronic acids, provide further binding
sites for the divalent cations that stabilize the outer membrane. The outer
core is more variable; five different structures are found in different
isolates of _E. coli_ , for example.

The outermost portion of LPS is the hypervariable O-antigen polysaccharide
(O-PS), which gets its name from its role in serotyping clinical isolates
(e.g., _E. coli_ O157). There are more than 180 structurally and serologically
distinct O-antigens in _E. coli_ alone and these arise from recombination and
horizontal gene transfer events. This diversity reflects a remarkable range of
sugar residues, including free and amidated uronic acids, amino sugars,
methylated and deoxygenated derivatives, acetylated sugars, and nonsugar
substituents (e.g., amino acids and phosphate). O-PSs are repetitive
polysaccharides with one to eight sugars (and noncarbohydrate substituents)
per repeat unit. Each chain can contain one to hundreds of repeats but there
is a preferred (modal) cluster of chain lengths in LPS isolated from an
individual strain. This is evident in the characteristic cluster of bands in
the sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
profile ([Fig. 21.4](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f4/?report=objectonly)),
where each higher band reflects an O-PS with one additional repeat unit. In
mammalian pathogens, O-PS chain length is critical for resistance to
complement-mediated killing, but it can also influence interactions of
bacteria with macrophages. The exposure of O-PSs makes them prime targets as
receptors for bacteriophages, and this may be a driving force in the evolution
of their structural diversity. Some mucosal pathogens, such as _Neisseria_ and
_Campylobacter_ , produce a truncated (nonrepeating) serological-determining
glycan that may be subject to phase variation. These LPS forms are often
referred to as lipooligosaccharide (LOS) ([Fig.
21.4](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Substantial effort has been invested in studying its biosynthesis and in
developing approaches to target the enzymes involved in LPS formation. Lipid A
biosynthesis involves a highly conserved nine-step pathway (the Raetz
pathway), named after Christian Raetz, who was largely responsible for its
discovery and characterization. In the _E. coli_ prototype, it begins with the
precursor UDP-GlcNAc and culminates with the product lipid A-Kdo2. The early
steps in this pathway occur in the cytosol but the acylation steps are
membrane-associated. The two β-hydroxyl-linked fatty acids are added only
after the Kdo units, so mutations (or inhibitory compounds) affecting the
precursor CMP-Kdo block lipid A synthesis at the stage of the tetraacyl (lipid
IVA) intermediate. The formation of Kdo2–lipid A is normally essential for
survival of _E. coli_ , but is not true in a few bacteria (including _N.
meningitidis_ and _A. baumannii_ ). Once complete, lipid A-Kdo2 molecules may
enter the LPS export pathway or may provide an acceptor for addition of the
core oligosaccharide by the sequential action of nucleotide sugar-dependent
GTs and kinases, before export. Lipid A (or lipid A-core) are substrates for
MsbA, an ABC transporter that flips these molecules to the periplasm.

At the periplasmic face, lipid A-core molecules may be modified by the
addition of O-PS or translocated directly to the cell surface ([Figure
21.5](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f5/?report=objectonly)), contributing to
heterogeneity in the final LPS species that is reflected in the SDS-PAGE
profile ([Figure 21.4](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f4/?report=objectonly)).
The assembly of O-PS occurs independently of lipid A-core, and most bacterial
species use one of two main synthetic strategies. Both strategies involve the
formation of undecaprenyl diphosphate-linked intermediates at the cytoplasmic
face of the inner membrane, using nucleotide sugars as activated donors. In
one pathway, individual lipid-linked repeating units are synthesized and
flipped to the periplasmic face of the membrane by a transporter (Wzx),
related to MurJ from peptidoglycan assembly (see above). In the periplasm, the
polymerase (Wzy) transfers a nascent O-PS chain from its undecaprenol carrier
to the nonreducing terminus of the newly exported lipid-linked repeating unit,
extending the chain one repeat unit at a time. An additional protein, Wzz (a
member of the polysaccharide copolymerase [PCP] family) regulates the
polymerization reaction to yield O-PS chains within a particular (modal) size
range that is appropriate for their function(s). This generates the
distribution seen in SDS-PAGE profiles ([Figure
21.4](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f4/?report=objectonly)). In the alternative
pathway, the full-length O-PS is completed in the cytoplasm by sequential
sugar transfer to the nonreducing terminus of the lipid-linked glycan. The
final product is then exported by a dedicated ABC transporter. Depending on
the bacterial species, the length of the O-PS is determined either by
competition between the export and chain-elongation enzymes, or by a chain-
capping enzyme. Regardless of which pathway is used, completed O-PSs are
available in the periplasm; they are transferred from their undecaprenol
carriers to the lipid A-core acceptor by O-PS ligase (WaaL) ([Figure
21.5](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f5/?report=objectonly)). This enzyme is an
integral membrane GT whose catalytic site lies in the periplasm.

Final translocation of LPS molecules to the cell surface is mediated by a
conserved LPS translocation pathway comprising seven principle protein
components ([Figure
21.5](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f5/?report=objectonly)). This ATP-driven
molecular machine exports an estimated 70,000 molecules/min in growing _E.
coli._ An ABC protein complex (LptBFG) extracts the LPS from the inner
membrane and transfers it into the periplasmic part of the pathway. In _E.
coli_ , a scaffold comprised of LptA is flanked by domains from LptC and LptD
to bridge the two membranes. These domains share the same fold and are thought
to create a unidirectional groove that sequesters the acyl chains in the
trafficking LPS molecules. At the outer membrane, the LPS molecules are
proposed to enter the lumen of LptD and escape into the membrane via a lateral
opening. Ongoing ATP hydrolysis drives the continuing export.

Protein glycosylation was once thought to be a property confined only to
eukaryotes. However, it is now apparent that N- and O-linked protein
glycosylation systems are also present in Archaea and many genera of bacteria.

Extensive advances have been made in understanding the biosynthesis of
bacterial glycoproteins and four general pathways have been identified. There
are the traditional pathways for N- and O-linked glycosylation resembling
their eukaryotic counterparts and nontraditional pathways that are unique to
bacteria. For traditional N-glycosylation, this system has only been described
in Gram-negative bacteria and _Campylobacter jejuni_ is the model system.
Nucleotide-activated sugars in the cytoplasm are assembled onto
undecaprenylphosphate in steps resembling the early stages of O-PS
biosynthesis. The completed oligosaccharide is then flipped en bloc across the
inner membrane into the periplasm, the equivalent of the eukaryotic
endoplasmic reticulum. Subsequently, the STT3 ortholog of the
oligosaccharyltransferase (OTase) complex transfers the oligosaccharide
posttranslationally onto asparagine residues of at least 60 different proteins
by recognizing the bacterial sequon: D/E-X1-N-X2-S/T (where X1 and X2 cannot
be proline). The sole OTase protein, PglB, also hydrolyzes the oligosaccharide
from the lipid and releases this glycan as free oligosaccharide (fOS) into the
periplasm. In _C. jejuni_ , fOS concentrations can comprise 2.5% of the dry
cell weight and are influenced by osmotic stress. In _C. jejuni_ , a cluster
of 10 _pgl_ genes encodes enzymes responsible for the synthesis and transfer
of the heptasaccharide:
GalNAc-α1,4-GalNAc-α1,4-[Glcβ1,3]GalNAc-α1,4-GalNAc-α1,4-GalNAc-α1,3-diNAcBac-β1
(diNAcBac is 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxyglucopyranose). The N-glycans of
_Helicobacter pullorum_ , _Helicobacter winghamensis_ , _Wolinella
succinogenes_ , and _Desulfovibrio gigas_ have also been examined. An active
full-length PglB OTase from _Campylobacter lari_ was cocrystallized with an
acceptor peptide providing the first structure of any OTase.The crystal
structure of the _C. jejuni_ ABC transporter (i.e., PglK flippase) was also
solved and showed that the heptasaccharide and pyrophosphate linker are
shielded from the inner membrane lipid bilayer while the undecaprenyl anchor
interacts with the lipid bilayer and is responsible for triggering
translocation.

γ-Proteobacteria, such as _Haemophilus influenzae_ , _Yersinia enterocolitica_
, and _Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae_ , possess a nontraditional cytoplasmic
pathway for N-glycosylation that does not involve assembly of oligosaccharides
on a lipid-linked intermediate, but instead transfers single glycan moieties
to proteins from nucleotide-activated precursors. The soluble
glycosyltransferases (NGT) required for N-glycosylation in these organisms are
also completely unrelated to the conventional STT3 orthologous OTases but
prefer the eukaryotic sequon, N-X-S/T. _H. influenzae_ N-glycosylates its
autotransporter adhesion, HMW1, with single glucose and galactose residues.

Consistent with N-glycosylation, bacteria possess both traditional and
nontraditional pathways for O-glycosylation. For the traditional
O-glycosylation system that mirrors the process in eukaryotes, both Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacteria use nucleotide-activated sugars and
soluble glycosyltransferases in the cytoplasm to modify serine and threonine
residues on specific proteins, particularly surface structures such as
flagella, pili, and adhesins. Pseudaminic acids and related nonulosonic sugars
are common monosaccharides attached by _C. jejuni, Helicobacter pylori_ , and
_Aeromonas caviae_ to their flagella and these modifications are essential for
filament assembly and bacterial motility.

The nontraditional pathway for O-glycosylation in Gram-negative bacteria
involves glycosyltransferase assembly of nucleotide-activated sugars onto
undecaprenylphosphate, flipping of the completed oligosaccharide en bloc
across the inner membrane into the periplasm, and addition of glycans onto S/T
residues by a general OTase. This alternate pathway has been thoroughly
characterized in _Neisseria_ species in which multiple proteins (including
pilin) are glycosylated with an oligosaccharide containing diNAcBac (or
variants such as glyceramidoacetamidotrideoxyhexose or
diacetamidodideoxyglucopyranose) at the reducing end, the same carbohydrate
attached to Asn residues by the _C. jejuni_ N-glycosylation pathway. Gram-
positive bacteria lack surface LPS, but many instead possess a regular array
of glycoproteins known as S-layers. The oligosaccharides on these S-layers are
also first assembled onto an undecaprenylphosphate carrier and subsequently
added onto S/T residues of S-layer proteins, but can also be coupled to
hydroxyl groups of tyrosine residues.

Bacteria encounter extreme differences in osmolarity in the environment (and
must withstand up to 6 atmospheres of turgor pressure!) and have evolved both
physical and chemical mechanisms to resist disruption.
[Peptidoglycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/peptidoglycan/), as discussed
earlier, provides a structural barrier to osmotic swelling. In many α, β, and
γ proteobacteria, a chemical mechanism also exists to protect the inner
membrane. An osmotic buffer is provided by β-glucans in these Gram-negative
organisms, termed osmoregulated periplasmic glucans (OPGs), and previously
known as membrane-derived oligosaccharides ([MDOs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/membranederivedoligosaccharidesmdos/)). These compounds constitute up to
5% of the dry weight of _E. coli_ , and their synthesis is induced by low
osmotic conditions. These characteristics are similar to the production of fOS
derived from the N-glycosylation pathways of _Campylobacter_ species, which
lack normal OPGs.

OPGs were first discovered during the analysis of _Agrobacterium tumefaciens_
culture supernatants and rediscovered in studies of phospholipid turnover in
_E. coli_ , which showed that the polar head groups of phosphatidylglycerol
were transferred to low-molecular-weight, water-soluble oligosaccharides (and
thus named [MDOs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/membranederivedoligosaccharidesmdos/)). Other organisms, including
_Pseudomonas_ , _Rhizobia_ , _Brucella_ , and _Salmonella,_ also make these
compounds. However, because not all oligosaccharides contain membrane
phospholipid head groups, they were renamed OPGs. Although the precise
structure of OPGs varies, they consist of D-glucose units with a β-linked
backbone. The OPGs comprise four families based on their structure. Family I
members include _E. coli_ and join 5–12 linear glucose units in β1-2 linkage
with α1-6 glucose branches. Family II members include _Agrobacterium_ and
synthesize cyclic glucans with 17–25 glucose units joined by β1-2 linkages.
The family III/IV members include _Bradyrhizobium_ and also synthesize cyclic
glucans with 10–28 glucose units joined by both α- and β-linkages. In
addition, the oligosaccharides can contain phosphoethanolamine,
phosphoglycerol, and phosphocholine as well as acetyl, succinyl,
methylmalonyl, and phosphoryl groups, which could add charge to the neutral
species.

In _E. coli_ , one inner membrane glucosyltransferase (OpgH), requiring UDP-
Glc as a donor and acyl-carrier protein as a cofactor, is involved in the
biosynthesis and transport of OPGs across the inner membrane. A second
periplasmic glucosyltransferase (OpgG) is involved in glucose branch addition
and size regulation of the OPG molecules. Interestingly, OpgH was recently
shown to play another role as a nutrient-dependent regulator of _E. coli_ cell
size. It is therefore not surprising that OPGs influence several biological
processes in addition to their involvement in osmoregulation.

Many bacteria produce long-chain extracellular polysaccharides. These can be
broken down into two groups; CPSs maintain an association with the cell
surface, creating a hydrophilic surface layer known as the capsule, whereas
secreted EPSs have limited association with the cell surface post export. The
basis for the retention of CPSs at the cell surface is not always known. In
_Streptococcus pneumoniae_ , this is sometimes achieved by a covalent linkage
to peptidoglycan, whereas some _E. coli_ CPSs possess a novel terminal
glycolipid composed of an oligosaccharide of β-linked Kdo residues attached to
lysophosphatidylglycerol, and this may be retained in the outer membrane. In
other cases, noncovalent charge-based interactions with other components on
the cell surface may be more important. EPSs and CPSs often impart a mucoid
appearance to bacterial colonies and both show extensive structural diversity
([Figure 21.6](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f6/?report=objectonly)). _E. coli_
with ∼80 K antigens (CPS antigens) and _S. pneumoniae_ with more than 90
capsule types provide extreme examples of this diversity. _Mycobacterium
tuberculosis_ secretes arabinomannan and mannan in addition to long α-glucan
chains.

Extracellular polysaccharides have functions as varied as the environmental
niches occupied by the producing bacteria. Given their highly hydrated nature,
these polymers are frequently linked to protection against dessication. In
many cases, they mask underlying receptors for bacteriophages, although CPSs
themselves provide additional receptors and this may help drive the structural
diversity. For a bacteriophage to infect encapsulated bacteria, it must
penetrate the polysaccharide layer and, for this reason, bacteriophages
provide a wide range of glycosidases with unique specificities. CPSs are
prevalent in pathogens, where they prevent phagocytosis and (in some cases)
complement-mediated killing. Antibodies directed to CPSs overcome these
limitations and the effective pneumococcal vaccines (e.g., Prevnar and
Pneumovax) provide excellent examples of the potential of CPSs as vaccine
candidates. However, some CPSs in important pathogens are poorly immunogenic
because of their mimicry of host cell components. Examples include production
of hylauronan by group A streptococci ([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/));
α2-3sialyllactosamines by group B streptococci ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)); α2-8-linked polysialic acid, which mimics
embryonic NCAMs, made by _E. coli_ K1 and _N. meningitidis_ (meningococcus)
serogroup B, among others; and production of mimics of the glycosaminoglycans
([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) heparosan and chondroitin by isolates of
_E. coli_ and _Pasteurella multocida_ ([Figure
21.6](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f6/?report=objectonly)). These are
remarkable examples of convergent evolution by bacteria, generating molecular
mimics of “self-associated molecular patterns” (SAMPs) of eukaryotes.

EPSs may also aid in health promotion. CPS production is vital for the ability
of _Bacteroides_ species to colonize the gut, and these are the most abundant
members of the gut microbiota. In _Bacteroides fragilis_ , a phase-variation
mechanism controls the expression of multiple loci (generating multiple
structures), but only one is needed for colonization. However, certain CPS
structures (e.g., polysaccharide A [PSA], not to be confused with polysialic
acids; [Figure 21.6](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f6/?report=objectonly)) show
zwitterionic properties and exert a powerful role in immunomodulation and the
maturation of the immune system. The capacity of other members of the
microbiota and “probiotic” bacteria (e.g., Gram-positive _Bifidobacteria_ ) to
produce EPSs ([Figure
21.6](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f6/?report=objectonly)) with wide-ranging
physicochemical properties may have additional positive impacts on human
health.

EPSs are prominent in a variety of plant pathogens and symbionts. For example,
the EPS produced by the Gram-negative phytopathogen, _Xanthomonas campestris_
is critical for its detrimental effects on feed crop brassicas. The polymer
(known as xanthan gum; [Figure
21.6](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f6/?report=objectonly)) blocks the flow of
water, leading to wilting and further damage. The unusual physical properties
of xanthan gum have led to a variety of commercial applications including food
additives (thickeners). Biofilms are particularly dependent on EPSs. Biofilms
are dynamic and structurally complex bacterial communities enclosed within a
matrix composed of polysaccharides, proteins, and nucleic acids. They can be
found on tissue surfaces as well as on nonbiological surfaces such as
pipelines, ship's hulls, medical implants (including catheters and
prostheses), and teeth (where they form plaque). Within the biofilm, a
combination of the protected environment and altered cell physiology can help
protect bacteria from some antimicrobial compounds. Some bacteria may produce
multiple EPSs contributing to biofilms, and their precise structures may be
critical for creation of a proper biofilm architecture, as in _Pseudomonas_.
Certain glycan structures appear well adapted to roles in biofilm communities
and are therefore more widely distributed. Many biofilm-forming bacteria
produce poly- _N_ -acetyl glucosamine (PNAG), also known as polysaccharide
intercellular adhesin ([Figure
21.6](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f6/?report=objectonly)) and this is being
targeted in small-molecule inhibitor and vaccine strategies to eradicate
biofilm bacteria.

Assembly systems for CPSs and EPSs are broadly divided into three mechanisms
that are distinguished (in part) by the nature of the acceptor on which they
are built ([Figure 21.6](/books/NBK453062/figure/ch21.f6/?report=objectonly)).
The pathway cannot be reliably inferred from the structure of the glycan
product. A large variety of CPSs and EPSs use undecaprenol diphosphate-linked
intermediates and follow a synthetic pathway indistinguishable from Wzx/Wzy-
dependent O-antigens described above. In fact, some bacteria produce
O-antigens and CPSs/EPSs with the same structures. The CPS form shares the
same early steps in the pathway but instead of ligating the product to lipid
A-core a CPS-dedicated export machinery spanning the periplasm and outer
membrane is used. The features that distinguish CPSs and EPSs in this type of
assembly process are unknown. In Gram-positive bacteria with Wzx/Wzy-dependent
processes, the nascent polysaccharide is then either released as an EPS, or
transferred from undecaprenol and attached via a phosphodiester linkage to
MurNAc residues in peptidoglycan. In streptococci, this is catalyzed by an
enzyme related to those that link WTAs to the same site in peptidoglycan.
Several Gram-negative bacteria assemble CPSs using a conserved lyso-
phosphatidylglycerol-(Kdo)n acceptor. The prototypes are found in _E. coli_
and _N. meningitidis_ but the system is conserved across a range of mucosal
pathogens. Here, polymerization of the lipid-linked glycan is completed in the
cytoplasm and is exported via an ABC transporter. The transporter is linked to
additional proteins that span the periplasm and outer membrane in a
configuration thought to resemble certain drug efflux pumps in bacteria. The
final assembly pathway seems to operate independently of a lipid carrier and
requires a processive polymerase called a synthase. Examples are found in
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria but seem to be confined to EPSs. The
prototypical hyaluronan and cellulose synthases from streptococci and Gram-
negative bacteria show different architectures, but both are sufficient for
both synthesis and export across the cytoplasmic membrane. The molecular
details underlying these processes have been resolved by the crystal structure
of cellulose synthase. In Gram-negative bacteria, a periplasmic scaffold links
the synthase to an outer membrane protein channel.

Although the focus of this chapter is on the glycobiology of bacterial cell
envelopes, their involvement with monosaccharides and complex carbohydrates
extends much further. Bacteria also produce a variety of intracellular glycans
and glycosylated molecules. The storage compound glycogen provides one well-
distributed example, but cytoplasmic glycosylated proteins and glycolipids are
frequent. Mycobacteria also contain a growing list of unusual glycosylated
molecules, which may be related to their ability to withstand a variety of
stresses.

Bacteria produce a wide range of glycan-binding proteins. These proteins
include adhesins that facilitate bacterial colonization, exotoxins that bind
to host membrane glycans, and single-sugar-binding proteins involved in
metabolism. Bacterial glycan-binding proteins are discussed in more detail in
[Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/).

Finally, the diversity of bacterial lifestyles arises from their capacity to
metabolize a wide range of sugars and other carbon sources. Their role in the
degradation of large polysaccharides during biomass conversion is also well
documented and represents an aspect of biofuel and other commercial processes.
For the degradation of cellulose in Clostridia and other organisms, a range of
glycosidases and carbohydrate-binding modules are assembled into a surface
complex (the cellulosome) via noncatalytic cohesin and dockerin structural
modules. The role of the Bacteroidetes (and other members of the gut
microbiota) in breaking down dietary fiber and host-derived mucosa glycans is
an emerging topic with important health impacts. These bacteria possess a
remarkable array of carbohydrate-active enzymes and they adapt to dietary
changes. Like cellulose degradation, a complex nanomachine is involved.
Evolved polysaccharide utilization loci encode proteins that sense, bind, and
degrade different complex substrates as well as transporters that import
products for further metabolism in the periplasm. Assembling the various
enzymes into a highly organized complex of this type affords synergy and
efficiency. Considering that the number of bacteria may outnumber human cells
10-fold, it is not surprising that bacteria also play important roles in our
own metabolism, immune development, and disease susceptibility. We continue to
learn more about the intricate pathways for bacterial glycan biosynthesis and
the ability of these organisms to capture and catabolize carbohydrates.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Jeffrey D. Esko, Tamara L. Doering, and the late Christian Raetz and
appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Andreas Geissner, Kristina
Mlinac-Jerković, and M. Osman Sheikh.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.022

This chapter describes current knowledge of archaeal glycobiology. Like in
bacteria, glycans are essential parts of the cell wall and the extracellular
matrix of the archaeal cell. Recent discoveries shed light on a tremendous
structural and functional diversity of carbohydrates in this domain of life.
In particular, the pathways of N-linked protein glycosylation, homologous to
the eukaryotic N-glycosylation machinery, generate a wide variety of N-linked
glycans in different archaeal species.

Based on Carl Woese's pioneering use of 16S ribosomal (r)RNA analysis, the
Archaea were first recognized as a separate domain of life, distinct from
either Bacteria or Eukarya. As the first Archaea identified were isolated from
some of the most physically challenging environments on the planet, such as
those defined by extremes in salinity, pH, or temperature, it was assumed that
all Archaea were extremophiles. However, it has since become clear that
Archaea account for a major portion of the microbial population in a variety
of “normal” biological niches. In addition to expanding our views on where
life can exist, the study of Archaea has also led to many important
discoveries.

From the earliest studies on Archaea, glycobiology-based efforts proved
important. Most importantly, they helped to break dogma, such as the long-held
belief that protein glycosylation was a posttranslational modification
restricted to eukaryotes. The discovery that Archaea did not contain
peptidoglycan in their cell wall was one of the main arguments used to
distinguish this group of microbes from Bacteria. Indeed, at the time, cell
wall composition was considered to be “the only useful phylogenetic criterion,
other than direct molecular phylogenetic measurement” to distinguish between
the two prokaryotic domains. However, some Archaea were shown to include a
distinct polymer, termed pseudomurein (or pseudopeptidoglycan), in their cell
wall, whereas other archaeal species were found to assemble cell walls based
on different sugar-based polymers. Today, as more and more archaeal species
are cultivated, it is becoming clear that Archaea present numerous variations
in the composition of the cell surface. For instance, although many species
seem to mainly rely on a cell envelope in which the cytoplasmic membrane is
enclosed by a two-dimensional crystalline proteinaceous layer called the
surface (S)-layer, strains surrounded by two membranes have been identified.
[Figure 22.1](/books/NBK453046/figure/ch22.f1/?report=objectonly) summarizes
current knowledge about archaeal cell surfaces.

Since Neuberger's discovery of protein glycosylation in the late 1930s
([Chapter 1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/)) and his later description of the _N_
-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)-β-asparagine link connecting the glycan to the
modified protein, it became generally accepted that protein glycosylation was
a process limited to eukaryotes. This belief persevered until 1976, when
Mescher and Strominger showed that the _Halobacterium salinarum_ S-layer
glycoprotein, the sole component of the S-layer in this organism, was subject
to both N- and O-glycosylation, thus offering the first example of a
noneukaryotic glycoprotein. Available evidence argues for protein
glycosylation being an almost universal trait of the Archaea. Accordingly,
lessons learned from the study of archaeal glycobiology reveal evolutionary
insights into mechanisms present in all domains of life.

Similar to the bacterial domain, there is no cell wall structure unique to all
Archaea. However, like in Bacteria, there are building blocks that are found
in different archaeal clades. Some of these cell wall components are very
similar in structure to bacterial counterparts, but they seem to be the
product of convergent evolution, whereas other cell wall–generating processes
seem to be homologous to pathways in the eukaryotic extracellular matrix
assembly. The biophysical properties of these cell wall building blocks
provide the basis for the ability of many archaeal species to thrive in
extreme habitats.

Although pseudomurein was identified as a component of the cell wall early in
the study of Archaea, it subsequently became clear that in terms of
distribution, use of this structure was relatively limited. Pseudomurein
shares structural similarities with bacterial murein yet presents significant
differences ([Figure
22.2](/books/NBK453046/figure/ch22.f2/?report=objectonly)). Pseudomurein
usually consist of _N_ -acetyl-L-talosaminuronic acid linked via a β1-3
linkage to _N_ -acetyl-D-glucosamine, unlike murein, which consists of
alternating _N_ –acetylmuramic acids linked via β1-4 linkage to GlcNAc.
Moreover, the glycan strands of pseudomurein are cross-linked by peptides
composed of L-amino acids (glutamic acid, alanine, and lysine), in contrast to
the D-amino acids used in murein. Pseudomurein surrounds cells of all species
belonging to the genus _Methanopyrus_ and the order Methanobacteriales, which
can, as in the case of _Methanothermus fervidus_ , be bordered by an outer
S-layer. As no archaeal homologs of bacterial murein biosynthesis proteins
have been identified, a novel biosynthesis pathway for pseudomurein has been
proposed. However, notable core sequences consist of alternating β-linked
GlcNAc and an acidic sugar, suggesting a shared evolutionary origin.

The majority of characterized Archaea rely on a proteinaceous cell wall, the
S-layer, comprising a regularly structured two-dimensional array based on a
single protein species, the S-layer glycoprotein, or a limited number of
proteins. S-layer glycoproteins have proven to be excellent reporters of
posttranslational modifications in Archaea, including N-glycosylation as
discussed in detail below.

The rod-shaped cells of _Methanospirillum hungatei_ and _Methanosaeta
concilii_ form long filamentous chains in which each cell is surrounded by an
S-layer presenting hexagonal symmetry or by a rigid granular layer similar to
an S-layer, respectively. The long filamentous chains are further enclosed by
a tubular proteinaceous sheath. These sheaths form a paracrystalline structure
based on a simple p2 lattice distinct from that of the S-layer. Based on
several cross-links involving cysteines, these sheaths are highly stable
against proteases and detergents. Depending on the species, the proteinaceous
sheaths can be posttranslationally modified by the attachment of various
sugars.

The extremely halophilic _Haloquadratum walsbyi_ has a unique square shape
with a length of 1.5–11 µm but a thickness of only 0.1–0.5 µm. These cells are
surrounded either by an S-layer or by two S-layer sheets, depending on the
strain. These cells also secrete halomucin, an extremely large glycoprotein
that is highly similar to mammalian mucin, which stays loosely connected to
the cell. Halomucin is heavily glycosylated, containing more than 280
potential N-glycosylation sites, with an average possibility of modification
every 32 residues. This cell envelope is further enforced by analogs of
halomucin, termed Hmu2 and Hmu3, and most likely by a poly-γ-glutamate
capsule, because homologs of bacterial genes encoding for CapBCA, involved in
the biosynthesis of the protein complex, were found. It is hypothesized that
this unique protective cell envelope allows _H. walsbyi_ to cope with
salinities in solar salterns that approach the limit of life.

The cell wall of the highly halophilic and alkaliphilic genus _Natronococcus_
(3.5 M salt and pH 9.5–10) consists of a glutamine polymer. In contrast to
poly-γ-D-glutamyl polymers in the bacteria _Bacillus_ , _Sporosarcina_ , or
_Planococcus_ , the archaeal polymer is formed from L-glutamines linked via
the γ-carboxylic group, yielding a chain of about 60 monomers. Also in
contrast to the bacterial polymer, the poly-γ-L-glutamine chain is
glycosylated, containing two types of oligosaccharide. The first
oligosaccharide consists of a GlcNAc pentasaccharide at the reducing end and
multiple GalA residues at the nonreducing end. The second presents a GalNAc
disaccharide at the reducing end and two Glc units at the nonreducing end.

_Halococcus morrhuae_ ([ _H. morrhuae_](/taxonomy/?term=Halococcus+morrhuae))
is an extreme halophile surrounded by an electron-dense 50–60-nm-thick cell
wall composed of a complex, highly sulfated heterosaccharide consisting of
glucosamine, galactosamine, gulosaminuronic acid, glucose, galactose, mannose,
glucuronic acid, galacturonic acid, N-acetylated amino sugars, and sulfated
subunits. Different heteropolysaccharides are thought to be connected via
glycine bridges between the amino groups of the glucosamines and the carboxyl
groups of the uronic residues. Although the building blocks of
heteropolysaccharide have been suggested, biosynthesis of this cell wall
structure has yet to be described.

Individual cells of _Methanosarcina_ rely on an S-layer as their cell wall. A
cubic aggregate of four cells (Sarcina) is covered by an additional rigid
fibrillar polymer called methanochondroitin. Degradation of methanochondroitin
results in disaggregation of the cells, underlining that the matrix is
responsible for maintenance of the aggregate. Methanochondroitin, which is
similar to eukaryotic connective tissue chondroitin, is composed of a
repeating trimer of uronic acid and two GalNAc residues. Yet unlike
chondroitin, methanochondroitin is not sulfated. A pathway of
methanochondroitin biosynthesis has been proposed based on activated
precursors in _Methanosarcina barkeri_ ([ _M.
barkeri_](/taxonomy/?term=Methanosarcina+barkeri)) cell extracts.
_Methanosarcina_ species can further modify the methanochondroitin condition
largely through the addition of glucose and galactose acids.

Members of the thermoacidophilic order _Thermoplasmatales_ (pH 1–2 and ∼60°C),
such as _Ferroplasma acidophilum_ and _Thermoplasma acidophilum_ , lack a
rigid cell envelope. Such organisms thus display a pleomorphic shape, similar
to mycoplasma. Stabilization of the cell is most likely realized by the
oligosaccharide portions of lipoglycans and membrane-associated glycoproteins.
The outwardly oriented glycan chains form a protective slime coat called the
glycocalyx. Studies of the glycan composition of the major membrane
glycoprotein revealed that the glycans mainly comprise mannose residues. A
more recent study of different cell-surface glycoproteins identified an
N-linked branched octosaccharide described below.

To date, S-layer glycoproteins from Archaea isolated from a wide range of
habitats have been studied to various degrees of detail. Possibly reflecting
the varied niches occupied by these organisms, their S-layer glycoproteins
(and indeed, their other glycoproteins, such as archaellins) bear N-linked
glycans that present wider diversity in terms of size, degree of branching,
identity of the linking sugar, modification of sugar components by amino
acids, sulfate, and methyl groups, and the presence of unique sugars than
reported to date in Bacteria or Eukarya. Currently defined archaeal N-linked
glycans are depicted in [Figure
22.3](/books/NBK453046/figure/ch22.f3/?report=objectonly).

The first archaeal N-glycosylated protein, the _H. salinarum_ S-layer
glycoprotein, was reported to be modified by two different N-linked
oligosaccharides, a repeating sulfated pentasaccharide linked via
N-glycosylamine to Asn-2 and a sulfated glycan linked by a glucose residue to
10 other Asn residues. The latter glycan is also N-linked to archaellins in
this haloarchaeon. Efforts undertaken at the time aimed at deciphering the
pathways responsible for the synthesis of these glycans solely relied on
biochemical approaches because neither suitable genetic tools nor a genome
sequence were available. Accordingly, dolichol pyrophosphate (Dol-PP) was
determined to be the lipid carrier of the repeating sulfated pentasaccharide
GlcNAc-linked to S-layer glycoprotein Asn-2, whereas dolichol phosphate
(Dol-P) was shown to bear the glucose-linked sulfated glycan decorating the
other N-glycosylated sites of this protein and of archaellin. It was also
shown that the sulfated polysaccharide is methylated when Dol-P-linked but not
when protein-bound. Finally, the ability of _H. salinarum_ cells to modify
sequon-bearing cell-impermeable hexapeptides with sulfated oligosaccharides
served to localize oligosaccharyltransferase activity to the external cell
surface.

Despite these biochemical advances, delineation of archaeal N-glycosylation
pathways had to wait until the genome age and the development of tools for the
genetic manipulation of various species. Through the subsequent identification
of homologs of eukaryotic and/or bacterial N-glycosylation pathway components,
genome scanning for additional components, the generation of deletion strains,
and characterization of reporter glycoproteins, _agl_ (archaeal glycosylation)
genes comprising archaeal N-glycosylation pathways have been identified in
several halophilic, methanogenic, and thermophilic Archaea.

In the last decade, progress in defining pathways of N-glycosylation has
relied on _Haloferax volcanii_ as a model organism. In _H. volcanii_ , a
series of Agl proteins mediate the assembly and attachment of a
pentasaccharide to select Asn residues of the S-layer glycoprotein and
archaellin ([Figure
22.4](/books/NBK453046/figure/ch22.f4/?report=objectonly)). Acting at the
cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane, the glycosyltransferases AglJ, AglG,
AglI, and AglE sequentially add the first four pentasaccharide residues (i.e.,
a glucose, a glucuronic acid, a galacturonic acid, and a methylated glucuronic
acid) onto a common Dol-P carrier, whereas AglD adds the final pentasaccharide
residue, mannose, to a distinct Dol-P. Assembly of the Dol-P-linked
tetrasaccharide also involves AglF, a glucose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase;
AglM, a UDP-glucose dehydrogenase; AglP, a methyltransferase; and AglQ, a
predicted isomerase. AglF and AglM have been shown to act in a sequential and
coordinated manner, transforming glucose-1-phophosphate into UDP-glucuronic
acid in vitro. AglB, the archaeal oligosaccharyltransferase, transfers the
lipid-linked tetrasaccharide to select Asn residues of target proteins. The
final mannose residue is subsequently transferred from its Dol-P carrier to
the protein-bound tetrasaccharide in a reaction requiring AglR, a protein that
either serves as the Dol-P-mannose flippase or contributes to such activity,
and AglS, a Dol-P-mannose mannosyltransferase. Most recently, the N-linked
pentasaccharide has been reported to comprise mannose-1,2-[methyl- _O_
-4-]glucuronic acid-β1-4-galacturonic acid-α1-4-glucuronic acid-β1-4-glucose-
β-Asn.

Interestingly, N-glycosylation of the S-layer protein is altered in response
to a change of environmental conditions: growing _H. volcanii_ in low-salt
medium alters the N-glycan structure in a site-specific manner.

[Mass spectrometry](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) efforts
had elucidated the glycan N-linked to archaellins of _Methanococcus voltae_
strain PS. GlcNAc, the linking sugar, is connected to a diacetylated
glucuronic acid, in turn linked to an acetylated mannuronic acid modified by a
threonine at the C-6 position (β-ManpNAcA6Thr-(1-4)-β-Glc-
pNAc3NAcA-(1-3)-β-GlcpNAc), although archaellins from other versions of _M.
voltae_ strain PS presented an N-glycan bearing an additional mass of either
220 or 260 Da at the reducing end, likely representing an additional sugar. It
emerges that an oligosaccharide is assembled on a lipid carrier, translocated
across the membrane, and transferred en bloc to asparagine residues of
polypeptides. As with _H. volcanii_ , the identification of _M. voltae_
N-glycosylation pathway components initially relied on gene deletion and
subsequent analysis of the N-linked glycans generated in the mutant strain. As
such, the oligosaccharyltransferase AglB and the glycosyltransferase AglA,
responsible for transfer of the third sugar of the glycan, were discovered.
The same strategy was later used to identify AglC and AglK,
glycosyltransferases proposed to be involved in the biosynthesis or transfer
of the second sugar. A genetics approach also assigned AglH responsibility for
adding the linking sugar GlcNAc to the lipid carrier on which the N-linked
glycan is assembled. Although _aglH_ could not be deleted in _M. voltae_ , it
was able to complement a conditional lethal mutation in the _alg7_ gene of _S.
cerevisiae_. Alg7, sharing 25% identity with _M. voltae_ AglH, catalyzes the
conversion of UDP-GlcNAc and Dol-P to UMP and Dol-PP-GlcNAc in the eukaryotic
N-glycosylation process.

Additional insight into _M. voltae_ N-glycosylation has come from in vitro
studies. Such efforts revealed the transfer of Dol-P-linked glycans to model
peptides by heterologously expressed and purified _M. voltae_ AglB. In
contrast to the earlier genetics-based studies showing AglH to be the first
glycosyltransferase of the pathway, a bacterially expressed version of the
enzyme was not able to add GlcNAc to Dol-P. On the other hand, purified AglK
catalyzed the formation of Dol-P-GlcNAc from Dol-P and UDP-GlcNAc. The seeming
disagreement between the genetics and biochemical results concerning AglH and
AglK functions remains to be solved.

_Methanococcus maripaludis_ has become an important model for genetic and
structural research on N-glycosylation in the methanogens. In _M. maripaludis_
, archaellins are modified by an N-linked tetrasaccharide similar to its _M.
voltae_ counterpart. In the _M. maripaludis_ glycan, the linking sugar is
GalNAc and not the GlcNAc used by _M. voltae_. The second sugar in the _M.
maripaludis_ glycan is a diacetylated glucuronic acid, as in _M. voltae_.
Although the third sugar is a modified mannuronic acid with a threonine
attached at the C-6 position in both organisms, there is an additional
acetamidino group added at position C-3 of the _M. maripaludis_ glycan. The
fourth and terminal sugar of the _M. maripaludis_ glycan is a novel sugar,
(5S)-2-acetamido-2,4-dideoxy-5- _O_ -methyl-α-L-erythro-
hexos-5-ulo-1,5-pyranose. It was later reported that the major _M.
maripaludis_ pilin is modified by the same N-linked tetrasaccharide bearing an
extra hexose branching from the linking GalNAc subunit. The pathway used for
N-glycosylation of _M. mariplaudis_ for archaellin has been largely
delineated. The process seemingly starts with the addition of UDP-GalNAc to
Dol-P by an unidentified glycosyltransferase. Like _H. volcanii_ Dol-P, _M.
mariplaudis_ Dol-P includes two saturated isoprenes, likely at the α- and
ω-positions. The AglO, AglA, and AglL glycosyltransferases add the next three
nucleotide-activated sugars, respectively. AglU adds the threonine moiety to
sugar three, apparently only following addition of the fourth sugar by the
glycosyltransferase AglL. AglV then methylates sugar four. The Dol-P-bound
tetrasaccharide is then flipped across the membrane by an unidentified
flippase, when AglB transfers the lipid-linked glycan to target Asn residues.

Studies on the N-glycosylation process in thermophilic Archaea have thus far
focused on _Sulfolobus acidocaldarius_ , a thermoacidophilic archaeon that
grows optimally at 80°C and pH 2. In _S. acidocaldarius_ , the S-layer
glycoprotein and cytochrome b558 _/_ 566 are modified by a N-linked
hexasaccharide comprising a glucose, two mannoses, two GlcNAc residues, and
6-sulfoquinovose (6-deoxy-6-sulfoglucose). This glycan is unusual in that it
is tribranched, in contrast to the linear or dibranched glycans N-linked
glycans described in halophiles and methanogens, and in that it contains the
typical eukaryal N-acetylated chitobiose core and 6-sulfoquinovose, a sugar
generally found only in photosynthetic membranes of plants and phototrophic
bacteria. Biosynthesis of the N-linked glycan is thought to begin with GlcNAc,
derived from a nucleotide-activated precursor, being transferred onto the
unusually short and highly saturated Dol-PP lipid carrier by AglH, a predicted
UDP-GlcNAc-1-P: Dol-P-GlcNAc-1-P transferase. Information concerning addition
of the second and third sugars is lacking. However, Agl3 converts UDP-glucose
and sodium sulphite into UDP-sulfoquinovose, which is subsequently added to
Dol-PP-bound trisaccharide by an unknown glycosyltransferase. In the final
steps of N-linked glycan assembly, the terminal mannose and glucose moieties
are added, with Agl16, a soluble glycosyltransferase, adding the final
glucose. A so far unidentified flippase translocates the Dol-PP-bound
hexasaccharide across the membrane, where AglB transfers the glycan to target
protein Asn residues. In contrast to what occurs in _H. volcanii, M. voltae_
and _M. maripaludis_ , namely, species in which N-glycosylation pathways have
been described, _aglB_ is essential in _S. acidocaldarius_. This could be a
reflection of _S. acidocaldarius_ belonging to the Crenarchaeota rather than
the Euryarchaeota, as do the other strains. As the two best studied archaeal
phyla, Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota differ significantly with respect to
several basic cellular processes, such as replication and cell division.

A survey of 168 archaeal genomes revealed that all but two encode AglB, the
archaeal oligosaccharyltransferase. As such, it would appear that
N-glycosylation is a common posttranslational modification in Archaea.
N-glycosylation has also been considered as assisting Archaea to cope with the
challenges of the extreme environments they often occupy. For instance,
enhanced surface charge in the face of hypersaline conditions and hence
increased solubility was offered as an explanation for the high sulfated sugar
content of N-linked glycans decorating the _H. salinarum_ S-layer glycoprotein
relative to its _H. volcanii_ counterpart, given the higher salinity of the
locale in which the former lives. In other instances, it is not clear how a
given N-glycosylation profile contributes to life in harsh surroundings. In
_H. volcanii_ , however, N-glycosylation may provide cells with the ability to
respond to changes in the surrounding salinity. As noted above, the
N-glycosylation profile of the S-layer glycoprotein differs in cells grown in
3.4 or 1.75 m NaCl-containing medium. Modified glycosylation in response to
environmental conditions has also been reported in the case of
_Methanospirillum hungatei_ , in which archaellins are only modified in low
phosphate-containing medium.

Although N-glycosylation is apparently important for archaeal protein
stability and maintenance of cell integrity, it may be more so in the face of
high temperatures. This could also explain why N-glycosylation is essential in
_S. acidocaldarius_ , in contrast to other Archaea studied to date.
Accordingly, the S-layer glycoproteins of the hyperthermophilic methanogens
_Methanocaldococcus jannaschii_ and _Methanotorris igneus_ present higher
numbers of potential N _-_ glycosylation sites, relative to their counterparts
in mesophilic methanogens.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Jeffrey D. Esko, Tamara L. Doering, and the late Christian R.H. Raetz, thank
Benjamin H. Meyer for the preparation of the original figures, and appreciate
helpful comments and suggestions from M. Osman Sheikh, Corinna Landig, and
Robert Townley.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.023

Fungi are a fascinating group of predominantly multicellular organisms. Fungal
species, such as _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ , have been instrumental in
defining the fundamental processes of glycosylation, but their glycobiology is
significantly different from animal or plant systems. This chapter describes
the glycan structures that compose the fungal cell wall, offers some insights
into novel glycobiology revealed through studying fungal systems, addresses
the use of fungi as experimental and synthetic systems, and delineates the
relationships of several important glycoconjugates to fungal biology and
pathogenesis.

More than 70,000 species of fungi have been described, and it is estimated
that more than 5,000,000 fungal species exist. The major fungal phyla are the
Chytridiomycota (zoosporic fungi), the Zygomycota, the Glomerulomycota
(abuscular mycorrhizal fungi), the Ascomycota (sac fungi, e.g.,
_Saccharomyces_ , _Candida_ , _Aspergillus_ , _Neurospora_ , and morel
mushrooms), and the Basidiomycota (e.g., mushrooms, rot fungi, and puffballs).
Most fungi are primarily made of hyphae (branching filaments) that form the
mycelium and multicellular structures such as fruiting bodies, whereas the
alternative fungal life-form is growth as unicellular yeast. The extracellular
matrix of all fungi, the cell wall, comprises complex polysaccharides
including mannans, galactans, glucans, and chitin and represents a major
target of fungicides.

More than 100 years ago, Louis Pasteur discovered that fermentation requires a
viable organism; since then yeast have been used as a model system to study
cellular metabolism. In fact, Pasteur coined the word “ferment” during his
work on alcohol production by yeast. _S. cerevisiae_ , or baker's yeast, has
been a wonderful resource for biologists and glycobiologists, especially
because many of the fundamental enzymes in aerobic and anerobic metabolism
(terms also invented by Pasteur) are shared between yeast and animals.
Breakthroughs in enzymology occurred following the 1897 discovery by the
Buchner brothers that extracts of yeast could make ethanol and carbon dioxide
from glucose, just like intact cells. Mannose is a major component of the
yeast cell wall; it was discovered by Emil Fischer in 1888, and the mannose-
rich glycans in yeast, historically called yeast gum, have been known since
the 1890s. The discovery that the yeast cell wall was composed of D-mannose
and work elucidating the chemical structures of other carbohydrates (and
vitamin C) led to Sir Walter Norman Haworth's 1937 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Luis Leloir subsequently discovered the activated precursors required for
carbohydrate synthesis, identifying UDP-glucose, GDP-mannose, and other
nucleotide sugars from yeast extracts. He was awarded the 1970 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry for this work. The discovery of hetherothallic yeast strains and the
subsequent development of an elaborate genetic system led to multiple ground-
breaking discoveries. For example, genetic studies initiated by the laboratory
of Phil Robbins led to the molecular characterization of the conserved N- and
O-glycosylation pathway in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the biosynthesis
of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins. Yeast secretory (
_sec_ ) mutants helped define the protein secretory pathway, by which
polypeptides travel from the ER through the Golgi apparatus to the cell
surface or surrounding milieu, becoming glycosylated en route. This
foundational work in cell biology was recognized by the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine awarded to Randy Schekman in 2013.

The fungal cell wall, like the plant cell wall, is composed of highly cross-
linked glycan polymers ([Figure
23.1](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f1/?report=objectonly)), which adapt to
growth conditions in a dynamic and flexible way and provide high mechanical
stability. In contrast to the plant cell wall, it is directly connected to the
plasma membrane and the specific cell-wall polysaccharides differ from those
of plants. The cell wall polymers of yeast cells or hyphae are composed of _N_
-acetylglucosamine, glucose, mannose, galactose, and/or rhamnose residues that
are incorporated into complex polysaccharides such as chitin, glucans,
mannans, galactomannans, glucomannans, rhamnomannans, and phosphomannans.

[Chitin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/chitin/) is a polymer of β1-4-linked
GlcNAc, which occurs in chains that typically exceed 1000 residues. These
chains self-associate to form microfibrils and are deposited primarily at the
bud neck of yeast or at septa in filamentous fungi. Chitin synthesis is highly
regulated by the coordinated action of multiple chitin synthases, so that
deposition occurs at the specific sites and times required for normal cell
growth and division. In _S. cerevisiae_ , three chitin synthases (Chs1p,
Chs2p, and Chs3p) have been described, along with multiple additional gene
products that participate in the regulation and localization of chitin
synthesis. Chitin may also be deacetylated to form the cationic polymer,
chitosan.

β1-3 glucan, synthesized from UDP-glucose at the plasma membrane, is the major
polysaccharide of the fungal cell wall. It is cross-linked at the nonreducing
end to chitin and β1-6 glucan, another UDP-glucose-derived polysaccharide, but
branched and water-soluble. In contrast to β1-3 glucan and chitin, which are
generated at the cell surface, β1-6 glucan is generated in the Golgi. In
filamentous ascomycetes, α1-3 and β1-4 glucans are found as well. The β1-6
glucan chains act as an attachment point for an external glycoprotein layer.
The majority of these cell wall proteins are GPI-dependent and carry highly
mannosylated N- and O-linked glycans (mannans). Cell-wall mannoproteins have
the conserved N-glycan core structure linked to Asn residues, but this
structure is further elaborated with an extensive repeating α1-6-linked
mannose chain. The repeating α1-6-linked mannose backbone is usually branched
by short chains of α1-2- and α1-3-linked mannose structures; some of these
side chains may be in phosphodiester linkage ([Figure
23.2](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f2/?report=objectonly)). The mannans are
highly heterogeneous in length and branching. In addition to large N-glycans
rich in mannose, yeast cell walls contain proteins bearing Ser/Thr-linked
O-mannose glycans, although these structures are of modest size compared with
the mannans on N-glycans ([Figure
23.3A](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f3/?report=objectonly)). During cell wall
assembly, these cell wall mannoproteins are linked via the oligosaccharide
part of the GPI anchor to the β1-6 glucan. Cell wall construction is
temporally and spatially controlled during the cell cycle, determining
cellular shape (hyphae vs. yeast) and function. The relative abundance of the
cell wall polymers varies between fungal species, and some include additional
polymers, such as galactomannans or rhamnomannans.

Yeast proteins are abundantly glycosylated, often bearing extensive N- and
O-glycans, as well as GPI anchors. As outlined in [Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/), N-glycan synthesis begins with synthesis of the
conserved lipid-linked core glycan donor, Glc3Man9GlcNAc2-P-P-Dol, which is
transferred to nascent polypeptides in the ER. Following core N-glycosylation,
the Glc3Man9GlcNAc2Asn-R is processed in mammals and yeast, with removal of
glucose residues by α-glucosidases I and II to generate Man9GlcNAc2Asn-R. In
mammals and _S. cerevisiae_ , the Man9GlcNAc2Asn-R is further trimmed to
Man8GlcNAc2 Asn-R by an ER-mannosidase. _Schizosaccharomyces pombe_ , however,
lacks this enzyme and stops processing at Man9GlcNAc2Asn-R. Man8GlcNAc2Asn-R
in mammals and Man9GlcNAc2Asn-R in _S. pombe_ are then substrates for the UDP-
Glc: glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (UGT) that generates Glc1Man8GlcNAc2Asn
and Glc1Man9GlcNAc2Asn in mammals and _S. pombe_ , respectively. This
reglucosylation is part of the quality control system for protein folding in
the ER ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). The monoglucosylated structure
is a ligand for the chaperone lectins calnexin and calreticulin in mammalian
cells. _S. cerevisiae_ lacks this glucosyltransferase, whereas both _S.
cerevisiae_ and _S. pombe_ express calnexin but lack a calreticulin homolog.
Specific trimming of the N-linked glycan regulates ER-associated degradation
(ERAD) of improperly folded proteins or unassembled protein complex units. In
_S. cerevisiae,_ trimming of the N-linked glycan to Man7GlcNAc2 structure by
the mannosidase Htm1p generates the degradation signal that is interpreted by
the lectin Yos9p and leads to export of the glycoprotein to the cytoplasm and
subsequent degradation. Notably, the quality control and ERAD processes differ
between fungal species; in some cases, components of the complete pathway are
absent. Reglucosylation of N-linked glycans by UGT is absent in _S.
cerevisiae_ , for example, and trimming of the Man9GlcNAc2 structure by ER-
localized mannosidases is not observed in _S. pombe_.

Fungal proteins are rich in O-linked mannose. This protein modification is
initiated by ER protein mannosyltransferases (PMTs) that use Dol-P-Man as a
mannose donor. There are several hetero- or homodimeric PMTs in _S.
cerevisiae_ and each may have a different substrate specificity and
glycoprotein preference. The Dol-P-Man for the yeast PMTs is synthesized in
the cytosol and then flipped into the secretory organelle lumen ([Figure
23.4](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f4/?report=objectonly), top right) to be
used for both N- and O-glycosylation pathways. Subsequent additions of mannose
residues to growing chains occur in the Golgi apparatus, where GDP-Man serves
as the donor for reactions catalyzed by Mn++-dependent mannosyltransferases.
This is interesting topologically, because GDP-Man is used to generate both
the biosynthetic Man5GlcNAc2-P-P-Dol precursor, which is then “flipped” into
the ER, and the Dol-P-Man donor of additional mannosylation reactions ([Figure
23.4](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f4/?report=objectonly)). Thus, GDP-Man does
not appear to be transported into the ER, although it is transported into the
Golgi apparatus.

[Mannan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/mannan/) extensions are generated in the
Golgi apparatus by mannosyltransferases that use GDP-Man as the donor, with
one or more specific glycosyltransferases to catalyze synthesis of each
linkage and branch. Phosphomannose addition occurs by transfer of Man-1-P from
GDP-Man donors in the Golgi apparatus.

Fungi express abundant GPI-anchored glycoproteins. As in other systems
([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)), GPI synthesis begins with construction
of a glycolipid precursor; this is then incorporated near the carboxyl
terminus of nascent glycoproteins in the ER by a GPI transamidase, which is
directed to the site of addition by a signal sequence that is concomitantly
cleaved. Yeast GPIs include the conserved trimannose core linked to
glucosamine-inositol-phosphatide, but this may bear modifications including
additional mannose residues or ethanolamine phosphodiesters ([Figure
23.5](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f5/?report=objectonly)). In an interesting
divergence from “higher” eukaryotes, the GPI anchor serves as a substrate for
transglycosylation reactions in cell wall assembly, leading to covalent
linkage of glycoproteins to the glucan matrix of the cell wall.

Yeast express a relatively simple array of glycolipids, although _Candida
albicans_ is notable for its large lipid-linked mannans. Many fungi make
short-chain glycolipids, commonly containing _myo-_ inositol phosphate linkers
to mannose that may be modified by galactofuranose (as in _Histoplasma
capsulatum_ ) or an additional mannose residue. _S. cerevisiae_ generates
forms with a single residue of mannose, whereas some longer galactose- and
mannose-containing glycolipids are found in _Aspergillus niger_. Short-chain
glycosylceramides such as Glc-Cer and Gal-Cer are also found in the fungi
_Schizophyllum commune_ and _Aspergillus fumigatus_ , respectively.

Yeasts have been valued for baking and brewing for thousands of years, but in
the last century or so scientific attention has particularly focused on _S.
cerevisiae_ , an oval budding yeast 5–10 µm across _._ The rapid growth of
this simple eukaryote, combined with its inexpensive culture and genetic
tractability, has made it a powerful and popular model system. Studies of _S.
cerevisiae_ have enormously influenced the fields of eukaryotic cell biology
and genetics, in addition to their impact on basic metabolism and enzymology
noted above.

_S. cerevisiae_ also contributed to defining the enzymology of GPI lipid
precursor biosynthesis ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). This complex
process, involving more than 20 genes, presented a significant biochemical
challenge to researchers in the field. However, as many of the steps are
conserved from yeast to mammals, analysis of _S. cerevisiae_ mutants offered a
complementary and powerful approach to its dissection. Mutants have also been
useful for dissecting yeast-specific processes, such as mannan synthesis; this
was elucidated by identifying _mnn_ mutants, which displayed aberrant antibody
or dye binding.

Despite the tremendous value of _S. cerevisiae_ as a model, it does have
certain limitations. These cells do not synthesize complex N-glycans, mucins
or mucin-type O-glycans, O-linked _N_ -acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc), sialic
acids, or glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) of the types found in vertebrates.
However, recent glycomic and site mapping studies suggest that _S. cervisiae_
cells use O-mannose on their nucleocytoplasmic proteins in a manner analogous
to O-GlcNAc in plants and animals. Like most other fungi, _S. cerevisiae_ also
lacks long-chain glycolipids (apart from those participating in the GPI
synthesis) and does not synthesize sialic acid or complex glycosphingolipids
or gangliosides like those found in mammals (although it is still valuable for
studying sphingosine and sphingolipid metabolism). _S. cerevisiae_ expresses
limited glycan diversity even compared with other fungi, with no galactose,
xylose, or glucuronic acid reported in its glycans. This must be kept in mind
when generalizing from this model to other organisms.

_S. pombe_ is a rod-shaped yeast, ∼3–4 µm in diameter and 7–14 µm long. Rather
than budding, this organism grows by elongation and fission to give equal-
sized daughter cells. Like _S. cerevisiae_ , it has a relatively small genome
of ∼14 million base pairs. _S. pombe_ has been useful as a genetically
manipulatable model organism for studying the cell cycle. Because it has well-
defined organelle structures compared with other yeast, it is a popular choice
for studies of intracellular structure. _S. pombe_ also synthesizes
mannoproteins and mannans, some containing galactose ([Figure
23.3A](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f3/?report=objectonly)); this may occur as
α1-2-linked caps that may also be pyruvylated. The galactose residues are
important in lectin recognition in nonsexual flocculation (clumping) of _S.
pombe_ , as evidenced by inhibition of this process by free galactose. In
contrast, flocculation in _S. cerevisiae_ is mannose-dependent and inhibited
by free mannose. The newly synthesized N-glycans in both _S. cerevisiae_ and
_S. pombe_ have nine mannose residues (Man9GlcNAc2Asn; [Figure
23.4](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f4/?report=objectonly)). In _S. cerevisiae_
, these structures are trimmed in the ER to form Man8GlcNAc2Asn (as discussed
above), but this does not occur in _S. pombe._

_Pichia pastoris_ is a methylotrophic, nonpathogenic organism that was
discovered in 1969 in a screen for yeast capable of using methanol. Methanol
is oxidized to formaldehyde and hydrogen peroxide by alcohol oxidase (AOX) in
the peroxisome. The formaldehyde exits the peroxisome and is oxidized to
formate and carbon dioxide in the cytoplasm for the purpose of energy
production. Any remaining formaldehyde is assimilated into
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone by condensation with
xylulose-5-monophosphate, in a reaction catalyzed by the peroxisomal enzyme
dihydroxyacetone synthase. _P. pastoris_ has become popular as a model system
for making recombinant proteins because it is easy to manipulate genetically
and can be grown to very high densities. The promoter for AOX is methanol
inducible, and transcripts driven by this promoter may comprise up to 5% of
the total poly(A)+ RNA in induced cells.

_P. pastoris_ has several advantages over _Escherichia coli_ as an expression
system, in that it does not produce inclusion bodies and it promotes the
correct folding of eukaryotic proteins. It also has certain advantages over
typical model yeast. First, although its basic N-glycosylation pathway is
similar to that of _S. cerevisiae_ and yields glycoproteins with oligomannose-
type N-glycans, these structures in _P. pastoris_ have only five to 15 mannose
residues (typically Man9GlcNAc2Asn and Man8GlcNAc2Asn) compared with the 50 to
150 mannose residues found in glycoproteins from _S. cerevisiae_ (see [Figure
23.2](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f2/?report=objectonly)). Hyperglycosylation
in _S. cerevisiae_ can interfere with protein folding, requiring use of _mnn_
mutants to limit hyperglycosylation and avoid this problem. Also, _P.
pastoris_ does not add outer α1-3-linked mannose residues to its N-glycans.
These structures are highly antigenic to humans, making proteins expressed in
_S. cerevisiae_ unsuitable for human pharmaceutical use. _P. pastoris_
synthesizes O-glycans with an O-linked mannose core attached to Ser/Thr
residues; most of these are short α1-2-linked mannose structures (see [Figure
23.3A](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f3/?report=objectonly)). Genetic tools
have been used to manipulate the machinery for glycoprotein assembly of both
_S. cerevisiae_ and _P. pastoris._ Deletion of ER- and Golgi-specific
functionalities in combination with the introduction of heterologous
hydrolases and glycosyltransferases has generated “humanized” yeasts and
filamentous fungi for the production of therapeutic glycoproteins ([Chapter
56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)).

_Kluyveromyces lactis_ metabolizes lactose to lactic acid and, along with _A.
niger_ and _E. coli_ , is grown to produce rennet for making cheese and other
products. _K. lactis_ is also a rich source of β-galactosidase, which
hydrolyzes lactose. _K. lactis_ synthesizes mannans similar to those in _S.
cerevisiae_ , but they lack mannose phosphate modifications, and some side
chains are capped with a residue of _N_ -acetylglucosamine. A _K. lactis_
mutant that lacks these _N_ -acetylglucosamine residues because of a
deficiency of the Golgi UDP-GlcNAc nucleotide sugar transporter has been
productively exploited in studies of heterologous transporters.

To convey the enormous diversity of fungi we will consider the basidiomycete
phylum, which encompasses fungi that produce spores from a pedestal-like
structure called the basidium. Basidiomycetes range from fungi with gills or
pores, such as common mushrooms and bracket fungi, to budding yeast that are
deadly human pathogens.

The basidiomycete _Dictyonema glabratum_ illustrates a distinct fungal
lifestyle. It lives in symbiosis with cyanobacteria _Scytonema_ sp. forming a
lichen, which is notable for its many unusual glycans. For example, although
the β-glucans of most lichens are linear, in _D. glabratum_ they are branched
with β1-3 and β1-6 linkages. The mannans of _D. glabratum_ also have an
α1-3-linked backbone, rather than the typical α1-6 linkages found in other
lichens, along with branches at the 2 and 4 positions. Finally, the xylans of
this organism are linear β1-4-linked polymers of xylose, more typical of those
found in “higher” plants and algae than in fungi. _D. glabratum_ also
synthesizes some unusual short glycolipids, including
glycosyldiacylglycerolipids, which are similar to plant glycolipids and
contain monosaccharides, disaccharides, and linear trisaccharides of
α1-6-linked galactopyranose. This fungus thus highlights the extensive glycan
diversity of the fungal kingdom.

Another example of glycan diversity is offered by _Cryptococcus laurentii_ ,
which has the unusual property of producing toxins that kill a pathogenic
yeast, _C. albicans_ (see below). The O-glycans of _C. laurentii_ are unusual
in that they contain mannose, xylose, and galactose ([Figure
23.3C](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f3/?report=objectonly)); these glycans are
synthesized by a unique set of mannosyl-, xylosyl-, and galactosyltransferases
that are not homologous to human enzymes. This diversity would not have been
predicted by studies of model yeast alone, emphasizing the importance of
examining glycans in a wide range of fungal species.

_Coprinopsis cinerea_ is a mushroom species that has gained prominence as a
model for studies of diverse topics including mating, sexual development,
meiosis, and the evolution of multicellularity. Its N-glycans typically are
high mannose type with five to nine mannoses, but may also have a bisecting
α1-4GlcNAc at the β-mannose.

Pathogenic fungi are a significant cause of plant and animal disease,
responsible for devastation of crops (e.g., _Phytophthora infestans_ , cause
of the Irish potato famine), decimation of animal populations (e.g., certain
bat, amphibian, and bee species), and serious human disease that kills an
estimated one million people each year. These organisms display diverse
glycans, which typically differ from those of the host and have been
implicated in multiple pathogenic processes.

_C. albicans_ (an ascomycete) is a normal commensal organism that can cause
illness ranging from irritations of mucosal surfaces to life-threatening
systemic infections. The _C. albicans_ cell wall contains β1-3- and
β1-6-linked glucans and chitin, similar to the _S. cerevisiae_ wall, and
mannans that are termed phosphopeptidomannans. It also produces unusual short
β1-2-linked mannose chains ([Figure
23.2](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f2/?report=objectonly)) that are highly
antigenic and are also expressed on phospholipomannan (PLM) antigens. PLM
antigens contain phytoceramide derivatives of _myo_ -inositol phosphate to
which mannose and the β1-2-linked polysaccharides are linked. The abundant
GPI-anchored proteins of _C. albicans_ have been implicated in fungal
adherence to host tissues.

The O-glycans of _C. albicans_ are short chains of α1-2-linked mannose
([Figure 23.3A](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f3/?report=objectonly)), which
lack the α1-3-linked mannose caps found in _S. cerevisiae_. As in _S.
cerevisiae_ , deficiencies of O-mannose addition generated through genetic
deletions are lethal, indicating that O-mannosylation is essential in this
yeast. _C. albicans_ mannans are also important in its interactions with host
cells, including macrophages and dendritic cells. In particular, these
structures are recognized by the mannose receptor and by dectin-2. These are
C-type lectins expressed by immune cells that are important in both innate and
adaptive immune responses (see [Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). PLM
antigens may be shed by _C. albicans_ and, through interactions with Toll-like
receptors (TLR-2), they can induce nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation and
cytokine responses such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) secretion.
Galectin-3, a ubiquitous member of the galectin family of lectins that is
highly expressed in macrophages, also appears to recognize _C. albicans_
expressing β1-2-linked mannose residues, resulting in opsonization of the
yeast.

_A. fumigatus_ is an environmental mold that spreads by airborne particles. It
causes serious disease in immunocompromised people that is difficult to treat,
leading to high mortality rates. As with other fungal pathogens, the surface
glycans of _A. fumigatus_ are critical for interactions with the host.
Presumably to alter surface properties and mask these structures from
recognition by host immune receptors, the cell wall of infectious forms of
this fungus is covered with specific proteins and melanin. The wall itself has
a core layer of branched β1-3-glucan covalently linked to other glucan
components, chitin, and galactomannan, which consists of a mannose backbone
with short galactofuranose side chains. The core is surrounded by a less
structured layer that mainly consists of α1-3-glucan. _A. fumigatus_ also
produces an extracellular matrix composed of monosaccharides, α1-3-glucan,
galactomannan, and a galactosaminogalactan composed of variable
galactopyranose repeats linked to _N_ -acetylgalactosamine. This structure has
been implicated in fungal virulence. N-glycans of _A. fumigatus_ are generally
high mannose structures without extensive elaboration, although they do
generate polymannans in some conditions. Their O-glycans, which may include
terminal glucose and galactofuranose modifications, are shown in [Figure
23.3](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f3/?report=objectonly).

_Cryptococcus neoformans_ is a ubiquitous environmental basidiomycete yeast
that causes severe disease in immunocompromised individuals, leading to
roughly half a million deaths per year worldwide. It is unique among
pathogenic fungi in having an extensive polysaccharide capsule that is
required for virulence ([Figure
23.6](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f6/?report=objectonly)). The capsule is a
dynamic structure that changes in thickness and composition depending on the
environment and growth conditions. It is particularly large in the context of
mammalian infection, in which it impedes host immune responses. It is composed
of two large (millions of Da) polysaccharides named for their monosaccharide
components: glucuronoxylomannan (GXM) and glucuronoxylomannogalactan (GXMGal).
GXM is an extended α1-3 mannan substituted with β1-2Xyl, β1-4Xyl, and β1-2GlcA
([Figure 23.7](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f7/?report=objectonly)); a subset
of the mannose residues are 6-O-acetylated (not shown). The second polymer,
GXMGal, is based on α1-6 galactan, with side chains of galactose, glucuronic
acid, mannose, and xylose ([Figure
23.7](/books/NBK453054/figure/ch23.f7/?report=objectonly)); the backbone is
also modified with small amounts of β1-2-linked galactofuranose (not shown).
Association of the capsule with the cell surface relies on a cell-wall
component, α1-3 glucan. Although α1-3 glucan is not present in the cell walls
of _S. cerevisiae_ or _C. albicans_ , it is common in other fungi. N-glycans
of _C. neoformans_ are generally high mannose with modest outer chain
extensions and may include xylose β1-2-linked to the trimannosyl core. Both N-
and O-glycans may also be modified with xylose and xylose phosphate.

In the context of fungal diseases, the similarity of fungi to their eukaryote
hosts becomes a liability, because it is challenging to develop antifungal
drugs that are not hampered by toxicity. The unique features of fungal glycans
may suggest drug targets to help improve this picture, and decrease the
roughly one million deaths each year due to fungal infections.

The major success story using this approach is the development of echinocandin
drugs. These antifungal lipopeptides inhibit β1-3-glucan synthesis in fungi
including _Candida_ and _Aspergillus_ , leading to cell wall compromise, and
are used clinically to treat invasive fungal infections. Despite this recent
advance, however, not all fungal pathogens are susceptible to the
echinocandins, and resistance to these compounds is a concern. Continued
efforts to target novel aspects of fungal glycobiology may advance the ongoing
search for new therapies.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Robyn Peterson.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.024

Recent research on plant glycan structure and function has typically
emphasized model plants such as _Arabidopsis_ and plants of commercial
importance. However, there is increasing interest in studying the glycans
produced by plants from all the major orders of the Viridiplantae. Such
studies, together with the availability of transcriptomic data for numerous
green algae and land plants, have begun to reveal a rich diversity in glycan
structures and insight into how some of these structures have changed during
the evolution of the Viridiplantae. In this chapter, we provide an overview of
the current knowledge of green plant glycan structures with an emphasis on the
features that are unique to land plants.

Viridiplantae (green plants) are a clade of photosynthetic organisms that
contain chlorophylls a and b, produce and store their photosynthetic products
inside a double-membrane-bounded chloroplast, and have cell walls that
typically contain cellulose. The Viridiplantae are comprised of two clades—the
Chlorophyta and the Streptophyta. The Chlorophyta contain most of the
organisms typically referred to as “green algae.” The term “algae” is also
used for several other groups of photosynthetic eukaryotes, including diatoms
and the red, brown, golden, and yellow-green algae. The Streptophyta comprise
several other lineages that are also referred to as “green algae” and the land
plants. Land plants include the liverworts, mosses, hornworts, lycopods,
ferns, gymnosperms, and flowering plants.

Green plants synthesize diverse glycans that vary in their structural
complexity and molecular size. Raffinose oligosaccharides (raffinose,
stachyose, and verbascose) are almost ubiquitous in the plant kingdom and rank
second only to sucrose in abundance as soluble carbohydrates. These
oligosaccharides are derivatives of sucrose that contain one or more α-Gal
residues. Plants also synthesize numerous low molecular weight glycoconjugates
that contain either aromatic (e.g., phenolic glycosides) or aliphatic
(glycolipids) aglycones.

Plant polysaccharides are linear or branched polymers composed of the same or
different monosaccharides. For example, cellulose is composed of 1-4-linked
β-D-Glc residues ([Figure
24.1A](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)), whereas the
structurally complex plant cell wall pectic polysaccharide, referred to as
rhamnogalacturonan II (RG-II), contains 12 different monosaccharides linked
together by up to 21 different glycosidic linkages ([Figure
24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)). Plant
proteoglycans are structurally diverse glycans in which carbohydrate accounts
for up to 90% of the molecule and is O-linked to the protein via hydroxyamino
acids ([Figure 24.3](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f3/?report=objectonly)).
Plant glycoproteins typically contain 15% or less of carbohydrate in the form
of N-linked oligomannose, complex, hybrid, and paucimannose oligosaccharides
(see [Figure 24.4](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f4/?report=objectonly)). Land
plants also form O-GlcNAc-modified nuclear and cytosolic proteins ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).

[Nucleotide sugars](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nucleotidesugars/) are the
donors used for synthesis of glycoconjugates and glycosylated secondary
metabolites ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). In plants, the majority of
these activated monosaccharides exist as their nucleotide-diphosphates (e.g.,
UDP-Glc), although at least one monosaccharide, Kdo, exists as its cytidine
monophosphate derivative (CMP-Kdo). Nucleotide sugars are formed from the
carbohydrate generated by photosynthesis, from the monosaccharides released by
hydrolysis of sucrose and storage carbohydrates, and by recycling
monosaccharides from glycans and the cell wall. Nucleotide sugars are also
formed by interconverting preexisting activated monosaccharides. To date, 30
different nucleotide sugars and at least 100 genes encoding proteins involved
in their formation and interconversion have been identified in plants.

Plant genomes contain numerous genes encoding proteins involved in the
synthesis and modification of glycans. These proteins are spread across many
enzyme classes in the [Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes ([CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/)) database
([Table 24.1](/books/NBK453049/table/CH24TB1/?report=objectonly)). Many of
these proteins may be involved in the formation and modification of the
polysaccharide-rich cell wall. Indeed, the unicellular alga _Ostreococcus
tauri_ , which is one of the few plants that does not form a cell wall, has a
much smaller number of genes predicted to be involved in glycan metabolism.

A substantial portion of the carbohydrate formed by photosynthesis is used to
produce the polysaccharide-rich walls that surround plant cells. Primary and
secondary cell walls are distinguished by their composition, architecture, and
functions. A primary wall surrounds growing and dividing plant cells and
nongrowing cells in the soft tissues of fruits and leaves. These walls are
capable of controlled extension to allow the cell to grow and expand but yet
are sufficiently strong to resist the cells internal turgor pressure. A much
thicker and stronger secondary wall is often formed once a cell has ceased to
grow. This wall is deposited between the plasma membrane and the primary wall
and is composed of layers that differ in the orientation of their cellulose
microfibrils. The secondary walls of vascular tissues involved in the movement
of water and nutrients through the plant are further strengthened by the
incorporation of lignin. The ability to form conducting tissues with lignified
and rigid secondary walls was an indispensable event in the evolution of
vascular land plants, as it facilitated the transport of water and nutrients
and allowed extensive upright growth. Secondary cell walls account for most of
the carbohydrate in plant biomass being considered as feedstock for the
production of biofuels and value-added chemicals ([Chapter
59](/books/n/glyco3/ch59/)).

Primary cell walls are composites that resemble fiber-reinforced porous gels.
The complex structures and functions of these walls result from the assembly
and interactions of a limited number of structurally defined polysaccharides
and proteoglycans. Wall structure and organization may change during cell
division and development and in response to biotic and abiotic challenges by
the differential synthesis and modification of the noncellulosic components or
by the addition of new components.

Primary walls of land plants contain cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin, in
different proportions. They also contain structural proteins/proteoglycans,
enzymes, phenolics, and minerals. Pectin and hemicellulose are present in
approximately equal amounts in the so-called type I primary walls of
gymnosperms, dicots, and nongraminaceous monocots, whereas hemicellulose is
far more abundant than pectin in the type II walls of the grasses. Much less
is known about the composition of the walls of avascular plants and green
algae, although it is likely that the walls of these plants contain cellulose,
pectin, and hemicellulose.

[Cellulose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/cellulose/), the most abundant
biopolymer in nature, is a linear polymer composed of 1-4-linked β-D-Glc
residues ([Figure 24.1A](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)).
Several of these chains are hydrogen bonded to one another to form
paracrystalline microfibrils. Each microfibril is predicted to contain between
18 and 24 glucan chains. The glucan chain is synthesized by a cellulose
synthase (CESA) complex that exists as a hexameric rosette structure on the
cells plasma membrane. Three CESAs, encoded by three different genes, are
believed to interact to form a trimeric complex, which in turn assembles into
a hexameric rosette. The catalytic site of each cellulose synthase is located
in the cytosol and transfers glucose from UDP-Glc onto the elongating glucan
chain. The mechanisms involved in the formation of a microfibril from
individual glucan chains are not well understood, although it may involve a
self-assembly process that is facilitated by specific proteins. The newly
formed microfibrils are then deposited in the wall of a growing cell with an
orientation that is transverse to the axis of elongation. This orientation may
be guided in part by protein-mediated interactions between CESA proteins and
cortical microtubules.

Naturally occurring cellulose is a mixture of two crystalline forms, Iα and
Iβ, together with surface chains and less crystalline material. The 1α and 1β
polymorphs differ mainly in the packing arrangement of their hydrogen-bonded
sheets. Many properties of native cellulose depend on interactions that occur
at the surface of the microfibrils. The surface chains are accessible and
reactive whereas the hydroxyl groups of the internal chains in the crystal
participate in extensive intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonding.
[Cellulose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/cellulose/) is insoluble in water and
somewhat resistant to hydrolysis by endo- and exoglucanases because of this
highly packed arrangement of the glucan chains.

Several types of enzymes including endoglucanases cellobiohydrolases and
β-glucosidases are required for cellulose depolymerization. Many of these
enzymes consist of a catalytic domain connected to a cellulose-binding module.
This module facilitates binding of the enzyme to the insoluble substrate. Some
microorganisms also produce copper-dependent oxidases that render crystalline
cellulose more susceptible to hydrolysis. Cellulases and other enzymes
involved in cellulose hydrolysis often exist as macromolecular complexes
referred to as cellulosomes. Improving the effectiveness of cellulosomes is an
area of active research, to increase the conversion of plant biomass to
fermentable sugar ([Chapter 59](/books/n/glyco3/ch59/)).

Hemicelluloses are branched polysaccharides with a backbone composed of
1-4-linked β-D-pyranosyl residues with an equatorial O-4 (Glc, Man, and Xyl).
Xyloglucan, glucuronoxylan, arabinoxylan, and glucomannan ([Figure
24.1B](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)–E) are included
under this chemical definition of hemicelluloses. Hemicelluloses and cellulose
have structural and conformational similarities that allow them to form
strong, noncovalent associations with one another in the cell wall, although
the biological significance of these interactions is a subject of debate.

Xyloglucans are distinguished from one another by the number of 1-4-linked
β-D-Glc _p_ backbone residues that are branched. XXXG-type xyloglucans are
composed of subunits in which three consecutive backbone residues bear an
α-Xyl substituent at O-6 and a fourth, unbranched backbone residue ([Figure
24.1B](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)). Each Xyl residue
(X side chain) may itself be extended by the addition of one or more
monosaccharides including β-D-Gal, α-L-Fuc, α-L-Ara, and β-D-GalA. Eighteen
structurally unique side chains have been identified to date, although only a
subset of these are synthesized by a single plant species. XXXG-type
xyloglucan is present in the primary walls of hornworts, lycopods, ferns,
gymnosperms, a diverse range of dicots and all monocots with the exception of
the grasses. XXGG-type xyloglucans, which have only two consecutive backbone
residues bearing an α-D-Xyl substituent at O-6, are present in the primary
walls of the grasses, some Solanaceae, mosses, and liverworts. The Xyl may be
extended by the addition of Gal, Ara, or GalA, but rarely, if ever, with Fuc.

Early models of dicot primary walls predicted that xyloglucan acted as tethers
between cellulose microfibrils and that controlled enzymatic cleavage of the
xyloglucan facilitated wall expansion and thus plant cell growth. However, the
identification of an _Arabidopsis_ mutant that is unable to synthesize
xyloglucan yet shows near normal growth and development challenged this notion
and led to the suggestion that pectin may have a more important role in
controlling wall expansion than previously believed.

Glucuronoarabinoxylan (GAX, [Figure
24.1C](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)) is the predominant
noncellulosic polysaccharide in the type II walls of the grasses. Its backbone
is composed of 1-4-linked β-D-Xyl residues, many of which are substituted at
O-3 with α-L-Ara _f_ residues. These Ara _f_ residues may be further
substituted at O-2 with an α-L-Ara _f_ or a β-D-Xyl _p_ residue. A small
number of the backbone residues are substituted at O-2 with α-D-Glc _p_ A and
its 4-O-methylated counterpart (MeGlc _p_ A).

The presence of 1-3, 1-4-linked β-glucans (also referred to as mixed-linkage
glucans) in the walls of grasses was once considered to be a unique feature of
these plants. However, structurally related mixed-linkage β-glucans have also
been identified in the walls of _Selaginella_ (lycopod) and _Equisetum_
(horsetails), although the evolutionary relationship between these β-glucans
is not known.

Pectins are structurally complex polysaccharides that contain 1-4-linked
α-GalA. Three structurally distinct pectins—homogalacturonan, substituted
galacturonan, and rhamnogalacturonan—have been identified in plant cell walls
([Figure 24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)).
Homogalacturonan, which may account for up to 65% of the pectin in a primary
wall, is composed of 1-4-linked α-GalA. The carboxyl group may be methyl-
esterified and the glycose itself may be acetylated at O-2 or O-3. The extent
of methyl-esterification is controlled by pectin methyl-esterases present in
the wall and affects the ability of homogalacturonan-containing glycans to
form ionic calcium cross-links with themselves and with other pectic polymers.
Such interactions alter the mechanical properties of the wall and may
influence plant growth and development.

Rhamnogalacturonans are polysaccharides with a backbone composed of GalA and
rhamnose (Rha) residues in the repeating disaccharide 4-α-D-Gal _p_ A-1-2-α-L-
Rha _p_ -1. Many of the GalAs are acetylated at O-2 and/or O-3. Depending on
the plant, between 20% and 80% of the Rha residues may be substituted at O-4
with linear or branched side chains composed predominantly of Ara and Gal,
together with smaller amounts of Fuc and GlcA ([Figure
24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)). Little is known
about the functions of these side chains and their contribution to the
properties of the primary wall.

Substituted galacturonans have a backbone composed of 1-4-linked α-D-GalA acid
residues that are substituted to varying degrees with mono-, di-, or
oligosaccharides. Xylogalacturonans contain single β-Xyl residues linked to
O-3 of some of the backbone residues ([Figure
24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)) whereas
apiogalacturonans have β-D-apiose (Api) and apiobiose linked to O-2 of some of
the backbone residues. Apiogalacturonans have only been identified in the
walls of duckweeds and seagrasses.

Rhamnogalacturonan-II, which accounts for between 2% and 5% of the primary
cell wall, is the most structurally complex polysaccharide yet identified in
nature. It is composed of 12 different monosaccharides linked together by up
to 21 different glycosidic linkages ([Figure
24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)). Four structurally
different side chains are attached to the galacturonan backbone. Two
structurally conserved disaccharides (side chains C and D) are linked to O-2
of the backbone. The A and B side chains, which contain between 7 and 9
monosaccharides, are linked to O-3 of the backbone. Several of the
monosaccharides in RG-II are O-methylated and/or O-acetylated.

Virtually all of the RG-II exists in the primary wall as a dimer cross-linked
by a borate ester. The ester is formed between the Api residue in side chain A
of each RG-II monomer ([Figure
24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)). The dimer forms
rapidly in vitro when the RG-II monomer is reacted with boric acid and a
divalent cation. However, the mechanism and site of dimer formation in planta
has not been determined. Borate cross-linking of RG-II is likely to have
substantial effects on the properties of pectin and the primary wall as RG-II
is itself linked to homogalacturonan ([Figure
24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)). Indeed, mutations
that affect RG-II structure and cross-linking result in plants with abnormal
walls and severe growth defects. Swollen primary walls and abnormal growth
together with reduced RG-II cross-linking are also a characteristic of boron
deficient plants.

Pectin is believed to exist in the cell wall as a macromolecular complex
comprised of structural domains—homogalacturonan, rhamnogalacturonan, and
substituted galacturonan—that are covalently linked to one another. However,
there is only a limited understanding of how these structural domains are
organized ([Figure 24.2](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f2/?report=objectonly)).
Molecular modeling of a pectin (∼50 kDa) containing homogalacturonan (degree
of polymerization ∼100) and rhamnogalacturonan with arabinogalactan side
chains, together with modeling of RG-II conformation have begun to provide
insights into the conformations and relative dimensions of each pectin
structural domain.

The conformation of the homogalacturonan chain is largely unaffected by the
conformation at the glycosidic linkage, by changes in its degree of methyl-
esterification or the presence of counter ions. The homogalacturonan region
has a persistence length of approximately 20 GalA residues, which is likely to
be sufficient to stabilize junction zones formed with Ca++. In vitro studies
suggest that the maximum stability of such junction zones is obtained with
oligomers containing approximately 15 nonesterified GalA residues. Thus
controlling the distribution of methyl-ester groups along the homogalacturonan
backbone provides a mechanism to regulate the physical properties of pectin,
including its ability to form gels. For a gel to form and not to be brittle,
other features including sequences that interrupt interchain associations in
the pectin macromolecule may be important. For example the structural
diversity and the conformational flexibility of the oligosaccharide side
chains of the rhamnogalacturonan domain will limit or prevent interchain
pairing. The presence of 1-2-linked Rha residues does not introduce kinks into
the backbone geometry of rhamnogalacturonan and thereby limit interchain
associations. Rather, it is the side chains linked to these residues that are
responsible for preventing or limiting interchain associations.

The conformations of the four side chains attached to the homogalacturonan
backbone may lead RG-II to adopt a “disk-like” shape. Well-defined tertiary
structures are predicted for the monomer and the dimer. In the dimer, borate-
ester cross-linking and Ca++ interchain pairing further stabilizes the two
disks. The apparent resistance of RG-II to wall-modifying enzymes together
with the formation of a cation-stabilized RG-II dimer likely results in a
structure that resists temporal changes. In contrast, homogalacturonan is
continually modified by the action of wall enzymes and its contribution to
wall architecture is therefore time dependent.

Increased knowledge of the physical properties of primary wall polysaccharides
and proteoglycans is required to understand how modulating the amounts and
structural features of a few common polysaccharides and glycan domains lead to
primary walls with diverse properties and functionalities. Further research is
also needed to determine if wall structure and function results from the
noncovalent interactions of polysaccharides and proteoglycans or from the
formation of glycan-containing architectural units with specific structural
and functional roles. The later scenario is analogous to the organization of
proteoglycans and O-linked mucins in the extracellular matrix of animal cells
([Chapters 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/), [16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/), and
[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

The secondary walls of woody tissue and grasses are composed predominantly of
cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. The inclusion of lignin results in a
hydrophobic composite that is a major contributor to the structural
characteristics of secondary walls.

Heteroxylans are the major hemicellulosic polysaccharide present in the
secondary (lignified) cell walls of flowering plants. These heteroxylans are
classified according to the type and abundance of the substituents on the
1-4-linked β-D-Xyl _p_ residues of the polysaccharide backbone.
Glucuronoxylans (GX), which are major components in the secondary walls of
woody and herbaceous eudicots, have a α-D-GlcA or MeGlcA substituent at O-2
([Figure 24.1C](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)).
Gymnosperm secondary walls contain arabinoglucuronoxylans (AGXs), which in
addition to MeGlcA substituents, have Ara _f_ residues attached to O-3 of some
of the backbone residues. The GAX in the secondary walls of grasses typically
contain less Ara _f_ residues than their primary wall counterpart ([Figure
24.1D](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)). Ferulic or
coumaric acids are often esterified to the Ara _f_ residues of GAX in grass
primary and secondary cells walls.

Eudicot and gymnosperm secondary wall GX and AGX have a well-defined glycosyl
sequence 1-4-β-D-Xyl _p_ -1-3-α-L-Rha _p_ -1-2-α-D-Gal _p_ A-1-4-D-Xyl _p_ at
their reducing end ([Figure
24.1C](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f1/?report=objectonly)). This sequence is
required for normal xylan synthesis during secondary cell wall formation and
may have a role in regulating the polymers chain length. This sequence is
present at the reducing end of heteroxylans of all monocots except the
grasses.

Genes that encode polysaccharide biosynthetic enzymes, including many of those
required for xyloglucan, glucuronoxylan, arabinoxylan, and cellulose synthesis
and some of those required for pectin synthesis have been identified. This
information, together with improved methods to generate recombinant plant
glycosyltranferases (GTs) with high enzymatic activity is providing a
framework for an increased understanding of how plant cell wall
polysaccharides are synthesized. There is general consensus that cellulose is
synthesized by GT complexes localized at the plasma membrane and that most
pectins and hemicellulose are synthesized in the Golgi apparatus. Members of
the cellulose synthase-like gene families, CSLF and CSLH are likely involved
in 1-3- and 1-4-linked β-glucan biosynthesis. However, there is considerable
debate about whether this polysaccharide is formed in the Golgi apparatus or
at the plasma membrane.

Despite advances in understanding how polysaccharides are synthesized we still
do not know how many of the wall polymers are synthesized by Golgi-localized
multienzyme complexes or if they are assembled by GTs localized in different
regions of the Golgi apparatus. We also do not understand how the newly
synthesized polymers are assembled into a functional cell wall.

Plants produce glycoproteins and proteoglycans that contain oligo- or
polysaccharides that are linked to hydroxyproline (Hyp) and serine (Ser). Hyp
is formed posttranslationally by endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized prolyl
hydroxylases and is O-glycosylated in the ER and in the Golgi apparatus. The
degree and type of Hyp glycosylation is determined to a large extent by the
protein's primary sequence and the arrangement of Hyp residues. Hyp
glycosylation is initiated by the addition of an Ara or a Gal residue.
Contiguous Hyp residues are arabinosylated, whereas clustered but
noncontiguous Hyp residues are galactosylated. Ser residues and occasionally
threonine residues may also be O-glycosylated in these proteins.

Three structurally distinct plant proteoglycans containing glycosylated Hyp
and Ser—the extensins, proline/hydroxyproline-rich proteoglycans, and
arabinogalactan proteins—have been identified. Extensins are hydroxyproline-
rich proteoglycans with Ser(Hyp)4 repeat sequences and contain between 50% and
60% (w/w) glycan. Most of the carbohydrate exists as oligosaccharides
containing one to four Ara residues linked to Hyp together with a small number
of single Gal residues α-linked to Ser. The proline/hydroxyproline-rich
proteoglycans, which contain from 3% to 70% (w/w) carbohydrate, are
distinguished from the extensins by amino acid sequence. Both of these
families of hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins (HRGPs) likely have a structural
role in the cell wall. The expression of genes involved in their synthesis is
developmentally regulated and is often induced by wounding and fungal attack
of plant tissues.

The glycopeptide signaling molecules PSY1, CLE2, and CLV3 contain
arabinosylated hydroxyproline and have numerous roles in plant growth and
development. A highly glycosylated Hyp-rich domain in which three or four Ara
residues are attached to Hyp and a single Gal residue is linked to Ser is
present in potato, tomato, and thorn-apple lectins.

Arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs) have a glycan content of up to 90% (w/w).
Chains of between 30 and 150 monosaccharides are linked to the protein by Gal-
O-Ser and Gal-O-Hyp linkages. These chains have a 1-3-linked β-Gal backbone
that is extensively substituted at O-6 with side chains of 1-6-linked β-Gal.
These side chains are terminated with Ara, GlcA, and Fuc residues. Some AGPs
may contain homogalacturonan, RG-I and xylan covalently linked to the
arabinogalactan ([Figure
24.3](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f3/?report=objectonly)) thereby forming a
protein–hemicellulose–pectin complex referred to as APAP1. The location of
this complex in the plant and its biological function remains to be
determined.

Several AGPs are secreted into the cell wall whereas others are linked to the
plasma membrane by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. Plant GPI
anchors contain a phosphoceramide core. The glycan portion of the GPI anchor
of pear cell AGP has the sequence α-D-Man1-2α-D-Man-1-6-α-D-Man-1-4-GlcN-
inositol. At least 50% of the Man attached to the GlcN (see [Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)) is itself substituted at O-4 with a β-Gal, a
feature that may be unique to plants. Many functions have been proposed for
the AGPs including their participation in signaling, development, cell
expansion, cell proliferation, and somatic embryogenesis.

Many of the proteins that have passed through the plant secretory system
contain N-linked oligomannose, complex, hybrid, or paucimannose-type glycans
([Figure 24.4](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f4/?report=objectonly)). The
initial stages of the synthesis of these N-glycans, including the transfer of
the oligosaccharide precursor from its dolichol derivative and the control of
protein folding in the ER are comparable in plants and animals ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). However, two modifications of N-glycans during
passage through the Golgi are unique to plants.

Oligomannose-type N-glycans are often trimmed in the _cis_ -Golgi and then
modified in the _medial_ -Golgi by N-GlcNAc transferase I (GnT-I) catalyzed
addition of GlcNAc to the distal Man of the core. In reactions that are unique
to plants, a β-Xyl is often added to O-2 of the core Man. In the _trans_
-Golgi, α-Fuc may be added to O-3 of the GlcNAc residue that is itself linked
to asparagine ([Figure
24.5](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f5/?report=objectonly)). The XylT and FucT
that catalyze these reactions act independently of one another but do require
at least one terminal GlcNAc residue for activity. The FucT is related to the
Lewis FucT family, whereas the XylT is unrelated to other known GTs.

The xylosylated and fucosylated N-glycans are often trimmed by α-mannosidase
II. A second GlcNAc may then be added by GnT-II. Some plant N-glycans do not
undergo further mannose trimming and proceed through the Golgi as hybrid-type
N-glycans. Complex and hybrid-type N-glycans may be further modified by the
addition of Gal and Fuc in the _trans_ -Golgi. Plant glycoproteins are either
secreted from the cell or transported to the vacuoles. Many of the
glycoproteins present in the vacuoles contain paucimannose type glycans,
suggesting that they are trimmed by vacuolar glycosidases ([Figure
24.5](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f5/?report=objectonly)).

The presence of sialic acid in the N-glycans of plant glycoproteins was
claimed but likely represented environmental contamination. Plants do have
genes that encode proteins containing sequences similar to sialyltransferase
motifs but their functions have not been established.

Only a few glycans of green algae have been studied in detail. For example,
the cell wall of _Chlamydomonas reinhardii_ is a crystalline lattice formed
from hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins. A sulfated polysaccharide composed of
Kdo and GalA is the major glycan in the cell walls of _Tetraselmis striata._
Some, but not all, of the glycans present in the cell walls of land plants may
also be present in the cell walls of some green algae. Several of the
polysaccharides produced by red and brown algae are used in the food industry
as gelling agents, stabilizers, thickeners, and emulsifiers. They are also
used in paints, cosmetics, and in paper and as reagents for scientific
research.

Agarose (agar) and carrageenan are sulfated galactans obtained from red
seaweeds. The polysaccharide is comprised of the repeating disaccharide 3-β-D-
Gal _p_ -1-4-3,6-anhydro-α-L-Gal _p_ -1 unit. Some of the D-Gal and L-Gal
units are O-methylated. Pyruvate and sulfate groups may also present in small
quantities. There are three main types of carrageenan—κ-carrageenan has one
sulfate group per disaccharide, ι-carrageenan has two sulfates per
disaccharide, and λ-carrageenan has three sulfates per disaccharide.

Alginic acid, a linear polysaccharide composed of 1-4-linked β-D-ManA and its
C-5 epimer 1-4-linked α-L-GulA, is obtained from various species of brown
seaweed. These monosaccharides are typically arranged in blocks of either ManA
or GulA separated by regions comprised of 4-Man _p_ A-1-4-Gul _p_ A-1
sequences.

Brown seaweeds produce polysaccharides that have potential in the treatment of
diseases. Laminaran, a linear storage polysaccharide composed of 1-3- and
1-6-linked β-D-Glc residues. There are reports that laminaran has
antiapoptotic and antitumor activities. Fucoidans are a group of sulfated
polysaccharides isolated from several brown algae that have been reported to
have anticoagulant, antitumor, antithrombosis, antiinflammatory, and antiviral
properties. Fucoidans have a backbone of 1-3-linked α-Fuc that is substituted
at O-2 with fucose and at O-4 with sulfate or fucose. Other fucoidans have
backbones of alternating 1-3- and 1-4-linked α-Fuc residues.

Glycoglycerol lipids are the most abundant glycolipids in plants. Mono- and
digalactosyldiacylglycerol have been identified in all plants, whereas tri-
and tetragalactosyldiacylglycerol have a more restricted taxonomic
distribution ([Figure
24.6](/books/NBK453049/figure/ch24.f6/?report=objectonly)). The synthesis of
these galactolipids is initiated by the formation of diacylglycerol in the ER
membrane and the chloroplast membrane. Galactolipids formed in the ER membrane
contain predominantly C16 fatty acids at the _sn_ 2 position and C18 fatty
acids at the _sn_ 3 position. The chloroplast pathway produces C18 fatty acids
at both positions. Each of these fatty acids is then desaturated to 16:3 or
18:3 acyl groups. Monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG) is synthesized by the
transfer of Gal from UDP-Gal to diacylglycerol by an MGDG synthase.
Digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG) is formed from MGDG by the transfer of Gal
from UDP-Gal by a DGDG synthase. These reactions occur primarily in the outer
chloroplast membrane. The products are then transported to the inner membrane
and the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. The presence and abundance of
MGDG in the chloroplast thylakoid membrane is important for normal
photosynthesis to occur. Sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol, which is formed from
diacylglycerol, is also abundant in the thylakoid membrane and may also have a
role in photosynthesis.

Small amounts of MGDG and DGDG are present in the plasma membranes of cells,
although the mechanism of galactolipid exchange among the membranes is not
understood. Inositolphosphoceramides that contain GlcN and GlcA have been
identified in plants, although their function remains to be determined.
Glycosphingolipids containing Gal and Fuc ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) are present in plant cell plasma membranes, but
none have been fully characterized. No gangliosides have been identified in
plants. However, there is evidence that Kdo-containing lipids with homology to
bacterial lipid A are present in plant organelle membranes.

Plants produce numerous phenolics, terpenes, steroids, and alkaloids that are
collectively referred to as secondary metabolites. Many of these compounds are
O-glycosylated or contain sugars linked via N, S, or C atoms. Glycosylated
secondary metabolites often have important roles in a plants response to
biotic and abiotic challenges and may also have value as pharmaceuticals.

In general, the addition of a single sugar or an oligosaccharide may increase
water solubility, enhance chemical stability, or alter both chemical and
biological activity. For example, the activity of several plant hormones may
be regulated by converting them to their glucose esters or their glucosides.
Digoxin and oleandrin are potent cardiac glycosides isolated from foxglove and
oleander, respectively. Myrosinase-catalyzed cleavage of S-linked Glc from
glucosinolates leads to the formation of pungent mustard oils when mustard and
horseradish are damaged. The steviol glycosides, which are far sweeter than
sucrose, are used as natural sugar substitutes. The bitter taste of citrus
fruits is due to naringin, a glycosylated flavanoid.

The availability of plant lines carrying mutations in specific genes has
yielded considerable insight into glycan biosynthesis and function.
Arabidopsis is widely used as a model dicot as it is easy to grow, has a short
life cycle and its relatively small genome has been sequenced and extensively
annotated. Numerous databases and resources are available for _Arabidopsis_ ,
most notably TAIR (The Arabidopsis Information Resource), which provides
access to a large number of plants carrying chemically induced or transfer DNA
(T-DNA) insertion mutations in genes of both known and unknown function.
Collections of other plant mutant lines including soybean and _Brachypodium_
exist, but are not yet as well developed as TAIR.

Several _Arabidopsis_ cell wall mutants were identified by screening 5200
chemically mutagenized _Arabidopsis_ plants for changes in the glycosyl
residue compositions of their cell walls. One of these mutants ( _mur1_ )
lacks an isoform of GDP-Man-4,6-dehydrase ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/))
and is deficient in Fuc. The mutant partially compensates for this deficiency
by adding L-Gal, a homolog of Fuc (6-deoxy-L-Gal), to xyloglucan, RG-I, and
RG-II. The addition of L-Gal to RG-II results in incomplete synthesis of the A
side chain and a decrease in borate cross-linking of RG-II, which is likely
responsible for the dwarf stature of _mur1_ plants. Two additional mutants (
_mur2_ and _mur3_ ) identified in the same screen were found to be defective
in xyloglucan side chain synthesis. Subsequently, all the other _Arabidopsis_
genes encoding the GTs required for xyloglucan side chain formation have been
identified. Some of the genes involved in xyloglucan synthesis in rice and
tomato have also been identified and functionally characterized.

Genes involved in the synthesis of the GX backbone ( _IRX10_ and _IRX10-L_ ),
the addition of GlcA ( _GUX_ ), the O-methylation of GlcA ( _GXMT1_ ), and
O-acetylation of the backbone ( _XOAT_ ) have been identified and functionally
characterized. There has also been progress in identifying grass genes and GTs
involved in GAX synthesis. No genes involved in the synthesis of the Rha-
containing reducing end sequence of secondary wall GX have yet been
identified.

A family of genes that encode GTs involved in the synthesis of 1-4-linked
α-galacturonans have been identified. Two of the encoded proteins, GAUT1 and
GAUT7, exist as a complex that synthesizes homogalacturonan. Only one GT
involved in RG-II synthesis has been identified. Similarly, few genes have
been identified and shown to have a role in the synthesis of the backbone and
side chains of RG-I.

Fucosyltransferases, glucuronosyltransferases, galactosyltransferases, and
arabinosyltransferases involved in arabinogalactan and extensin biosynthesis
have been identified. Plants carrying loss-of-function mutations in some of
the genes encoding these GTs show growth defects and reduced fertility.

Plants carrying mutations at different steps along the N-glycosylation pathway
have begun to provide insight into the role of protein glycosylation in
plants. Mutants ( _dgl1_ ) defective in the oligosaccharyltransferase complex
have phenotypes that range from reduced cell elongation to embryonic
lethality. However, a mutant ( _cgl_ ) that lacks GnT-I activity has no
discernible developmental or growth defects, even though it produces
glycoproteins enriched in Man5GlcNAc2 but lacking complex N-glycans.

Plant mutants defective in O-GlcNAc modification of proteins show numerous
changes in growth and development processes ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). It is not known how this modification affects
cellular processes as only a small number of O-GlcNAc modified proteins have
been identified.

The plant-specific modifications of N-glycans result in glycoproteins that are
often highly immunogenic and cause allergic responses in humans. The
demonstration that complex N-glycans are not essential for plant growth
initiated studies to engineer plant N-glycosylation pathways to produce
glycoproteins that do not activate the mammalian immune system. Plants lacking
the GTs that add Xyl and Fuc to N-linked glycans produce glycoproteins lacking
immunogenic glyco-epitopes. Other glycosylation pathways involved in the
addition of sialic acid and Gal must be introduced to fully “humanize” the
glycoproteins if plants are to be used to produce recombinant therapeutic
glycoproteins.

Glycolipids are important for chloroplast development and for photosynthesis.
The _mgd1_ mutant, which contains 50% of the normal amounts of MGDG, is
deficient in chlorophyll production and has altered chloroplast
ultrastructure. Additional evidence for the role of MGDG has been obtained
using galvestine-1 or (2-oxobenzo[d]imidazol-3-yl) piperidine-1-carboxylate, a
chemical inhibitor of monogalactosyldiacylglycerol synthases, which has been
shown to impair chloroplast development in _Arabidopsis_.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Corinna Landig
and Robert Townley.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.025

This chapter focuses on the nematode (roundworm) _Caenorhabditis elegans_ as
an example of the phylum Nematoda. _C. elegans_ provides a powerful genetic
system for studying glycans during embryological development and in primitive
organ systems.

_C. elegans_ is transparent, and individual cells can be easily visualized in
the living organism through all stages of development. Basically, the worm is
a tube within a tube ([Figure
25.1](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f1/?report=objectonly)). A cuticle composed
of a collagenous, multilayered, protective exoskeleton surrounds the worm. The
“mouth” at the anterior end connects to a tubular intestinal system, which is
composed of a muscular pharynx and an intestine. The gonad occupies most of
the body cavity. In the hermaphrodite, the gonad is bilobed, with each lobe
connecting via an oviduct and spermatheca to a shared midventral vulva and
uterus. The worm exists as two sexes, hermaphrodite or male (no female
organisms exist). Eggs pass through the spermatheca where fertilization takes
place by stored sperm, and the eggs begin to develop inside the mother. During
sexual reproduction, males fertilize hermaphrodites. The male sperm is also
stored in the spermatheca and is preferentially used during fertilization.

Gastrulation begins before egg laying; at this stage, the embryo contains
about 30 cells ([Figure
25.2](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f2/?report=objectonly)). Proliferation
results in an embryo of 558 relatively undifferentiated cells. Following this,
organogenesis/morphogenesis begins, terminal differentiation occurs, and the
embryo hatches. The animal normally passes through four larval stages, termed
L1, L2, L3, and L4 ([Figure
25.2](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f2/?report=objectonly)). The end of each
larval stage is marked by molting, when the cuticle is shed. In L1 larvae, the
nervous system, the reproductive system, and the digestive tract begin to
develop, and this is completed by the L4 stage. Mature adults develop ∼45–50 h
after hatching. Mature hermaphrodites contain 959 somatic cells, including 302
neurons, and 95 body-wall muscle cells. At this time, the hermaphrodite can
lay its first eggs, thus completing the 3.5 d life cycle. The adult
hermaphrodite produces oocytes for ∼4 d, resulting in about 300 progeny;
afterward, the animal lives for another 10–15 d. Overcrowding or starvation
results in the formation of dauer larvae, a dormant stage, which are easily
distinguished from other developmental stages by morphology and behavior.

Considering the large number of glycomic studies on _C. elegans_ since 2001,
it is probably not an exaggeration to state that this anatomically simple worm
has one of the most varied and unusual glycomes of any invertebrate organism
studied to date. Although there are a number of conserved elements in its
glycans, there are many notable differences between the types of glycans made
by _C. elegans_ and those in “higher” animals. There are, for example, no
sialic acids or other anionic moieties on its N-glycans, but it expresses a
wide range of fucosylated structures. The N-glycans are often truncated, but
contain modifications very different from those found in “higher” animals.
Moreover, worm O-glycans and glycolipids, which also lack sialic acids, have
different core structures. Although some predictions regarding the types of
oligosaccharides in the worm can be made from the range of glycosylation-
relevant genes in its genome, glycan analyses continue to surprise as to the
glycomic potential of this organism.

The N-glycans of _C. elegans_ are synthesized by the common eukaryotic pathway
involving generation of the 14-sugar precursor Glc3Man9GlcNAc2-P-P-Dol and
transfer of the glycan to asparagine residues within the sequon -Asn-X-
Ser/Thr- of nascent polypeptides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). These glycans can be trimmed to Man9GlcNAc2-Asn and
further to Man5GlcNAc2-Asn by α-glucosidases I and II and α-mannosidases I and
II. The Man5GlcNAc2-Asn can be modified by the addition of _N-_
acetylglucosamine to generate GlcNAc1Man5GlcNAc2-Asn, which is then further
processed in a unique way in _C. elegans_ ([Figure
25.3](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f3/?report=objectonly)). Subsequent
trimming and modification by Golgi β-hexosaminidases, α-mannosidases, and
α-fucosyltransferases generate truncated N-glycans with three or fewer mannose
residues (so-called paucimannosidic forms) and two types of core α1-3 fucose
residue, in addition to the common vertebrate modification with α1-6 fucose.
Although truncated N-glycans are common in _C. elegans_ , the organism also
generates more complex branched structures. An interesting modification is the
addition of galactose to core fucose residues and to a bisecting position of
the core β-mannose in a significant population of the N-glycans ([Figure
25.3](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f3/?report=objectonly)). Many hybrid and
complex N-glycans in _C. elegans_ contain phosphorylcholine linked to outer-
chain _N-_ acetylglucosamine residues (a modification that appears to be a
recurring feature of nematode glycoproteins) and hexose and fucose residues of
N- and O-linked glycans can be methylated.

The “mucin-type” O-glycans of _C. elegans_ contain core-1 structures common to
vertebrates ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)), but they also include
extended core-1 O-glycans containing β-glucose and glucuronic acid residues,
α1-2 fucose residues, and 2-O-methylated fucose ([Figure
25.4](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f4/?report=objectonly)). As in mammals and
insects, the _C. elegans_ genome encodes multiple UDP-GalNAc: polypeptide α-N-
acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (ppGalNAcTs) that modify Ser/Thr residues of
mucin core polypeptides. _C. elegans_ also contains a gene encoding the
relevant β1-3 galactosyltransferase (T-synthase), which generates the core 1
O-glycan structure.

Similar to mammals, plants, and insects, _C. elegans_ synthesizes O-GlcNAc on
Ser/Thr residues of cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, using a highly conserved
O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT); the worm also has the O-GlcNAcase that removes
O-GlcNAc ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Interestingly, deletion of
OGT, although fatal to vertebrate cells, is not lethal to _C. elegans_ but is
accompanied by a phenotype that resembles human insulin resistance. A related
phenotype is also produced by deletion of the O-GlcNAcase.

Glycosphingolipids ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) in _C. elegans_ have
a core consisting of GlcNAcβ1-3Manβ1-4Glcβ1-Cer, which is based, as in
insects, on the arthroseries Manβ1-4Glcβ1-Cer core rather than the common
Galβ1-4Glcβ1-Cer core found in vertebrates. In addition, _C. elegans_ has
genes encoding the enzymes for synthesis of GPI-anchored glycoproteins, but
the GPI anchor structures are not yet defined ([Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)).

_C. elegans_ has all of the enzymes for synthesizing the glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) and chondroitin and heparan sulfate (HS) but not those for keratan
sulfate (KS) or dermatan sulfate (DS). However, _C. elegans_ only generates
unsulfated chondroitin chains because it lacks the relevant sulfotransferases
and epimerase present in vertebrates ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). In
contrast, _C. elegans_ does have the sulfotransferases and epimerase for
generating HS, and the overall structure is similar to the chains elaborated
by vertebrates. _C. elegans_ does not make hyaluronan ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)).

As judged by the characterization of peptide-O-fucosyltransferase POFUT1 and
POFUT2 homologs, _C. elegans_ also synthesizes glycoproteins with O-fucose
(Fucα1-Ser/Thr) on epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains and
thrombospondin type-1 repeats (TSRs), in the context of precise consensus
sequences ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). Regarding elongation of this
developmentally relevant modification, there is no evidence as yet for the
necessary [Fringe](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/fringe/)-related β1-3GlcNAcT,
but a homolog of the β1-3-glucosyltransferase which modifies fucosylated TSRs
is predicted in the worm genome. Another [TSR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/thrombospondinrepeatstsr/)-modifying enzyme, the C-mannosyltransferase is
encoded by the _dpy-19_ gene. On the other hand, genomic data would suggest
that O-mannosylation of dystroglycan is absent from _C. elegans_.

The _C. elegans_ genome encodes homologs of many of the enzymes for
glycoconjugate biosynthesis that are found in “higher” animals and humans,
including enzymes for the synthesis of O-GalNAc (mucin-type) glycans,
O-GlcNAc, N-glycans, GAGs, glycosphingolipids (GSLs), and
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors. In contrast to vertebrates
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)), the worm lacks sialic acids and any
enzymes associated with sialic acid biosynthesis or utilization. Additionally,
on the basis of the structures of its N- and O-glycans, glycolipids, and GAGs,
_C. elegans_ is predicted to express a wide assortment of enzymes involved in
glycoconjugate metabolism. Indeed, the genome of _C. elegans_ appears to
encode about 300 carbohydrate-active enzymes ([CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/)
database; <http://www.cazy.org/>), including glycosyltransferases,
glycosidases, epimerases, polysaccharide lyases, and carbohydrate esterases
([Chapter 52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)). The glycosyltransferase family contains
more than 240 genes. To date, most of these putative enzymes are not
characterized, and very little is known overall about their expression or
function in _C. elegans_. Some information has arisen from phenotypes
generated by mutagenesis, as discussed below. Together, these studies have
identified some interesting differences and similarities between _C. elegans_
and vertebrates.

The _C. elegans_ genome contains some extremely large classes of
glycosyltransferase homologus, including 11 putative ppGalNAcTs, 32
α-fucosyltransferase homologs (5 α1-3FucTs, 26 α1-2FucTs, and 1 α1-6FucT), and
more than 20 β-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase homologs. Relatively few
glycan-modifying enzymes from _C. elegans_ have been shown to be functional;
in only a few cases has their acceptor specificity been characterized. Of the
peptide-modifying glycosyltransferases, eleven of the nematode ppGalNAcTs have
been prepared as recombinant proteins, but only five of them are active toward
mammalian peptide acceptors. The single _C. elegans_ cytosolic or nuclear
O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) and the GAG-initiating O-xylosyltransferase
homologs as well as its POFUT1 and 2 O-fucosyltransferases have been
characterized at the biochemical and genetic levels.

In terms of Golgi modifications of N-glycans, _C. elegans_ contrasts with
humans and most other vertebrates in that it has three genes, rather than just
one, encoding the β1-2 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GlcNAcT-1) that
catalyzes formation of GlcNAcβ1-2Man5GlcNAc2-Asn (see [Figure
25.3](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f3/?report=objectonly)). This product is
then acted on by a single α-mannosidase II to generate
GlcNAcβ1-2Man3GlcNAc2-Asn. As in many invertebrates, the antennal GlcNAc is
normally absent from the final glycan products and indeed _C. elegans_ has two
relevant β-hexosaminidases (HEX-2 and HEX-3), which cleave
GlcNAcβ1-2Man3GlcNAc2-Asn to generate the paucimannose structure
Man3GlcNAc2-Asn, a reaction not found in vertebrates. On the other hand, there
is no evidence for galactosylation of antennal GlcNAc and the closest _C.
elegans_ homolog to the human β1-4 galactosyltransferase is actually a β1-4
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase generating the LacdiNAc sequence
(GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc-R). _C. elegans_ can synthesize the canonical core
tetrasaccharide of GAGs, GlcAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-Ser, and can extend this
to generate chondroitin and HS. As mentioned above, the glycolipids in _C.
elegans_ have the unusual arthroseries core structure, and the organism lacks
a gene encoding the β1-4 galactosyltransferase that would synthesize the more
familiar Galβ1-4Glcβ1-Cer glycolipid core.

Expression of the known glycosyltransferases in _C. elegans_ has not been
systematically mapped at the cellular level during development or in the adult
organism. Many of the studies are based on promoter analyses using GFP as a
reporter. Therefore, the promoter region for a gene of interest (usually
0.5–1.5 kb upstream of the gene and sometimes including the upstream elements
and the first few exons of the gene) is ligated to the cDNA encoding GFP.
Transgenic animals are then produced by direct injection of DNA into the
hermaphrodite gonad. Newly developing animals take up this DNA and become
transgenic. Thus, one can observe promoter utilization in the different stages
of development (see [Figure
25.2](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f2/?report=objectonly)). Using this
approach, it has been found that some glycosyltransferase genes are widely
expressed, including the T-synthase (the β1-3 galactosyltransferase generating
core 1 O-glycans; [Figure
25.4](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f4/?report=objectonly)), the SQV-2
galactosyltransferase that adds the second galactose residue to the core
tetrasaccharide of GAGs ([Figure
25.5](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f5/?report=objectonly)), and the two
protein O-fucosyltransferases POFUT1 and POFUT2. In contrast, expression of
the six individual core-2 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases with sequences
related to core-2 enzymes in vertebrates (see [Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) occur in selective tissues. One gene, _gly-15_ ,
is expressed only in two gland cells. Similarly, among the 26 α1-2FucTs that
are predicted in _C. elegans_ , one of them ( _CE2FT-1;_ FUT-2) is expressed
in a single cell in embryos and exclusively in 20 intestinal cells of larval
stages L1–L4 and adult worms. Thus, in large gene families, individual members
may be expressed in a localized fashion and have unique activities toward
certain substrates, whereas single gene families appear to be expressed in all
cells.

Different methods exist to genetically manipulate _C. elegans_ and many of
these approaches have yielded important information about the functions of
glycosyltransferases, their glycan products and lectin-binding proteins.
Several dozen genes involved in glycosylation pathways have been shown to be
developmentally important in _C. elegans_ or important in resistance or
susceptibility to pathogens in the innate immunity of the worm. Only some of
the highlights of this work are described here. More details are available in
the literature cited at the end of the chapter.

Glycoproteins in _C. elegans_ have both N- and O-glycans, as discussed above.
In vertebrates, interference of the early steps in N-glycosylation or
O-glycosylation causes embryonic lethality or results in severe developmental
phenotypes. As in vertebrates, interference of the later steps in N- and
O-glycan biosynthesis in _C. elegans_ does not cause developmental problems.
As mentioned above, the genome of _C. elegans_ contains three genes ( _gly-12_
, _gly-13_ , and _gly-14_ ) that encode GlcNAcT-I-like enzymes, whereas
mammals have a single GlcNAcT-I gene. Promoter analyses show that _gly-12_ and
_gly-13_ are expressed in all cells beginning in embryogenesis, whereas
_gly-14_ is expressed only in intestinal cells from L1 to adults. Unexpectedly
and in contrast to mammals, deletion of any of these genes singly or in
combination does not affect _C. elegans_ development, but has a profound
effect on the N-glycome. The triple-knockout worms do not generate
paucimannosidic Man2-3GlcNAc2 N-glycans (with and without core α1-6-fucose),
but generate Man5GlcNAc2-Asn as the major structure. On the other hand, core
α1-3-fucosylation is not abolished in this mutant.

_C. elegans_ contains three α-mannosidase activities: one α-mannosidase
II/IIx-like activity involved in N-glycan processing and encoded by the
_aman-2_ ( _F58H1.1_ ) gene, one lysosomal enzyme, and a third Co++-dependent
enzyme. A mutant harboring a large deletion in the _F58H1.1_ gene generates
largely Man5GlcNAc2-Asn, GlcNAc1Man5GlcNAc2-Asn-R, and fucosylated and
phosphorylcholine-modified Man5GlcNAc2-Asn, but lacks the paucimannosidic
structures. In addition, the mutant has reduced levels of the core α1-3 fucose
antigen associated with antibodies to horseradish peroxidase. Interestingly,
promoter analyses show that the _F58H1.1_ gene is expressed in most cells of
the organism, but there is no obvious developmental phenotype in the _aman-2_
mutant.

Two of the largest gene families in _C. elegans_ are the ppGalNAcT and the
α-fucosyltransferase families. To date, however, there have been no
developmental phenotypes associated with the loss of any members of these
families. Although some ppGalNAcT isoforms may be redundant, most
fucosyltransferase homologs have no known function. However, three core
fucosyltransferases have been characterized and the glycomes of the
corresponding mutants analyzed. Although the _fut-8_ gene encodes an enzyme
with the same specificity as the mammalian _FUT8_ α1-6-fucosyltransferases,
two α1-3-fucosyltransferases (FUT-1 and FUT-6) with unusual substrate
preferences transfer fucose to the proximal and distal core GlcNAc residues;
whereas FUT-1, unlike plant and insect core α1-3-fucosyltransferases, cannot
transfer to glycans with a β1-2GlcNAc on the α1-3-mannose, the action of FUT-6
is blocked by the presence of α1-6-mannose. Also, activity of recombinant
forms of two α1-2-fucosyltransferases as well as of a fucose-modifying
β1-4-galactosyltransferase (GALT-1) have been reported. However, there are
still many holes in our knowledge as glycosyltransferases required for many
glycosidic bonds are still to be identified or we have many other
glycosyltransferase homologs for which no corresponding activity is known.

The biosynthesis of all fucosylated ligands requires the precursor GDP-fucose
and its transport into the Golgi apparatus by nucleotide sugar transporters
([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). Interestingly, the human disease
leukocyte-deficiency type II (LAD II) is caused by a defect in the transport
of GDP-fucose and the subsequent loss of fucosylated ligands important in
leukocyte trafficking and recognition by selectins ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). A search of the _C. elegans_ genome for putative
nucleotide sugar transporters led to the identification of several candidates,
one of which complemented the transport and fucosylation defect in LAD II
fibroblasts and led to the identification of the defect in these patients.

_C. elegans_ is also an interesting model system to study infection and innate
immunity. The organism may be colonized by different bacterial pathogens,
including _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ , _Yersinia pestis_ , and _Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis_. The two _Yersinia_ species generate a sticky biofilm (an
exopolysaccharide matrix encasing a community of bacteria) on the exterior of
the worm's head that impairs viability. _P. aeruginosa_ , in contrast,
colonizes the intestinal tissues. Another bacterium, _Microbacterium
nematophilum_ , sticks to the anus of the animals and induces an irritation in
the underlying hypodermal tissue. _Bacillus thuringiensis_ (Bt) infection
leads to destruction of the intestine, which is discussed in more detail below
in regard to glycolipids. Mutations in the worm, some of them affecting
glycosylation processes, have been found that affect colonization by these
bacteria.

An especially interesting set of mutations are the _srf_ mutants (altered
surface antigenicity mutants). Some of the _srf_ mutants were identified by
altered antibody or lectin binding to the cuticle, indicating that loss of
cuticle components exposed new antigens. _srf-3_ mutants are resistant to
infection by _M. nematophilum. srf-3_ encodes a nucleotide sugar transporter
that can transport both UDP-galactose and UDP- _N_ -acetylglucosamine,
suggesting that altered sugar composition of the cuticle resulting from
mutations in this transporter confer resistance to _M. nematophilum_.
Interestingly, there are 18 putative nucleotide sugar transporters in the
genome of _C. elegans_ , which is a considerably larger number than the known
nucleotide sugars (UDP-galactose, UDP-glucose, UDP- _N_ -acetylglucosamine,
UDP- _N_ -acetylgalactosamine, UDP-xylose, GDP-mannose, and GDP- fucose),
suggesting possible functional overlap in these transporters. _srf-3_ mutants
are deficient in glycosylation, in particular, they lack O-linked
glycoconjugates containing glucuronic acid and galactose and they also have
reduced levels of N-glycans and fucose.

_C. elegans_ , like other metazoa, possesses two protein O-fucosyltransferase
genes, homologous to the POFUT1 and POFUT2 in humans and Drosophila, and thus
has the capacity to generate O-fucose–containing glycoproteins, which in
animals are usually linked to serine/threonine residues within cysteine-rich
domains such as the EGF-like repeats and TSRs ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). This modification is essential for signaling
pathways in development and [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/)
signaling; RNAi studies suggest that at least the worm's POFUT2 (encoded by
the _pad-_ 2 gene) is required for normal morphogenesis.

During egg laying, fertilized eggs must pass through the vulva, which is a
simple tubular structure that links the gonads with the external cuticle.
During postembryonic development, vulva morphogenesis arises through the
invagination of a single layer of epithelial cells. Using mutagenesis, several
mutations that perturb invagination of the vulva were identified (designated
_sqv_ or squashed vulva). In the original screen, 25 mutations were identified
in eight genes named _sqv-1_ through _sqv-8_. All of the mutations produced a
similar phenotype: that is, partial collapse of vulval invagination,
elongation of the central vulval cells, hermaphrodite sterility associated
with maternal-effect lethality, and cytokinesis defects in the early embryo.
All eight _sqv_ genes show homology with vertebrate enzymes that are involved
in the biosynthesis of GAGs ([Figure
25.5](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f5/?report=objectonly)). _sqv-1, sqv-4,_
and _sqv-7_ encode proteins that have roles in nucleotide sugar metabolism and
transport. The SQV-7 nucleotide transporter was the first example of a carrier
that could import more than one nucleotide sugar into the Golgi ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). SQV-4 and SQV-1 proteins represent sequential
enzymes involved in the formation of UDP-glucuronic acid and UDP-xylose,
respectively, showing that the _sqv_ mutations most likely affect GAG
synthesis. Biochemical analysis of _sqv-6_ , _sqv-3_ , _sqv-2_ , and _sqv-8_
showed that they encode worm orthologs of the vertebrate transferases required
for the assembly of the linkage region tetrasaccharide common to HS and
chondroitin. Finally, characterization of _sqv5_ showed that it encodes the
chondroitin synthase. Thus, the various phenotypes (failed invagination of the
epithelial layer that forms the vulva, maternal-effect lethality, and
cytokinesis defects) result from defective chondroitin formation.

The requirement for chondroitin assembly in seemingly disparate systems may
result from biophysical changes in the lumen of the vulva or between the
eggshell and the embryo. One idea is that the high negative charge imparted by
the glucuronic acids in chondroitin attracts counterions that raise the local
osmolarity, causing a swelling pressure. Another possibility is that the
chondroitin acts as a physical scaffold bound to the cell membrane or
eggshell. Interestingly, the _sqv_ screen did not detect mutations affecting
genes that encode proteoglycan core proteins on which the chondroitin chains
assemble. Inspection of the _C. elegans_ genome also did not reveal any
homologs of vertebrate chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan core proteins.
Proteomic analysis subsequently led to the identification of nine novel
chondroitin proteoglycan (CPG) core proteins that contain chondroitin chains
([Figure 25.6](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f6/?report=objectonly)). Two of
these (CPG-1 and CPG-2) contain chitin-binding domains that presumably allow
the proteoglycans to interact with chitin in the eggshell, thus positioning
the proteoglycans between the eggshell and the plasma membrane of the embryo,
in which they could serve as spacers or osmotic regulators. Silencing _cpg-1_
and _cpg-2_ expression by RNAi recapitulates the cytokinesis defect observed
in _sqv_ mutants, suggesting that these are the relevant proteoglycans. The
proteoglycans involved in epithelial invagination have not yet been
determined.

HS biosynthesis in _C. elegans_ follows the same pattern observed in
vertebrate systems ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Mutations in the
pathway for HS biosynthesis are lethal in _C. elegans_. Two of the key genes
involved in this pathway are _rib-1_ and _rib-2_ , homologs of the vertebrate
genes _Ext2_ and _Ext1_ , respectively, which catalyze the polymerization of
the backbone of HS chains (GlcAβ1-4GlcNAcα1-4) ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Mutants in _rib-2_ , the worm homolog of _Ext1_ ,
have defects in development and egg laying. The worm genome also contains a
single gene for glucuronic acid C-5 epimerase ( _hse-5_ ) and five genes for
sulfotransferase activities (GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase [Ndst],
_hst-1_ ; uronyl 2-O-sulfotransferase, _hst-2_ ; 3-O-sulfotransferases,
_hst-3.1 and hst-3.2_ ; and 6-O-sulfotransferase, _hst-6_ ), all of which are
homologs of vertebrate genes involved in HS synthesis. In contrast,
vertebrates contain four Ndsts, three 6-O-sulfotransferases, and seven
3-O-sulfotransferases. Although mutations in the epimerase ( _hse-5_ ) and the
sulfotransferases ( _hst-6_ , _hst-2_ ) do not affect viability, they cause
defects in specific cell migration, axonal outgrowth and/or neurite branching.
Consistent with this finding, inactivation of the cell surface HS proteoglycan
syndecan (sdn-1) affects neural migration and axonal guidance. _C. elegans_
also produces two GPI-anchored HS proteoglycans. LON-2, a member of the
glypican family, negatively regulates a bone morphogenetic protein-like
signaling pathway that controls body length in _C. elegans_. Worms also
contain a homolog of the vertebrate basement membrane proteoglycan perlecan
(encoded by _unc-52_ ). At least three major classes of UNC-52 isoforms are
produced through alternative splicing, and distinct spatial and temporal
expression patterns occur throughout development. In keeping with the
“uncoordinated” phenotype, _unc-52_ mutants affect myofilament assembly in
body-wall muscle during embryonic development. Thus, as in vertebrates, HS
proteoglycans mediate many fundamental processes during development and in the
adult animal.

The arthroseries glycolipids in _C. elegans_ have a unique core structure
composed of GlcNAcβ1-3Manβ1-4Glcβ1-Cer ([Figure
25.7](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f7/?report=objectonly)). Some of these
glycolipids also contain phosphorylcholine modifications on _N_
-acetylglucosamine residues. Recent studies on the resistance of _C. elegans_
to bacterial toxins have led to interesting insights into the structures and
functions of glycolipids _._ Bt toxins are used in both transgenic and organic
farming because of their ability to kill insect pests. Bt is toxic to _C.
elegans_ , but following mutagenesis, Bt-resistant strains were identified and
classified as _bre-1_ through _bre-5_. None of the strains showed altered
development, but they were highly resistant to Bt. Unexpectedly, the Bt-
resistant mutants had truncated glycolipids, which turned out to be the
ligands for Bt in the intestinal epithelium. The _C. elegans_ glycolipids are
shown in [Figure 25.7](/books/NBK453089/figure/ch25.f7/?report=objectonly),
along with the genetic steps associated with different _bre_ mutants.

Although the _C. elegans_ genome encodes a number of predicted glycan-binding
proteins (GBPs), only a few of them have been characterized biochemically or
explored by genetic manipulation. The first GBP found in _C. elegans_ was a
galectin ([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)), which was isolated by
affinity-chromatography and sequenced in 1992. This was surprising because
until this observation, galectins were thought to be expressed only in
vertebrates. Amazingly, the _C. elegans_ genome encodes 28 putative galectins,
nearly twice as many as in humans. Only two of these proteins have been
studied in detail: a tandem-repeat 32-kDa galectin (LEC-6) and a prototypical
16-kDa galectin (LEC-1). Both galectins can bind to galactose-containing
ligands.

Some 283 _clec_ genes have been identified in the _C. elegans_ genomes that
encode proteins with C-type lectin domains (CTLDs) ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)) identified in the _C. elegans_ genome are
contained within 135 proteins (some proteins have multiple CTLDs), but only 19
of these CTLDs have sequences predicting carbohydrate recognition. The
functional roles of the CTLDs have not yet been studied in detail in _C.
elegans_. In contrast to the CTLD-containing proteins in vertebrates, most of
the proteins with CTLDs in _C. elegans_ have signal sequences and no
transmembrane domains, indicating that they are secreted proteins. Expression
of several of these CTLDs is up-regulated upon challenge of the animal with
nematocidal Bt strains and other pathogenic bacteria, pointing to a role of
these lectins in the innate immune system of _C. elegans_.

Studies in the nonparasitic nematode _C. elegans_ have been incredibly
rewarding because of the ease of genetic manipulation and culture. Much less
is known about parasitic nematodes, which cause tremendous death and suffering
in animals and people throughout the world. It might be expected that _C.
elegans_ and other nematodes share much in common in terms of glycoconjugate
structures and biosynthesis, but each nematode has differences in glycans
compared with _C. elegans._ These may pertain to their virulence and parasitic
requirements.

Some of the major parasitic nematodes that have been studied in terms of
glycoconjugates include _Ascaris suum_ , _Trichinella spiralis_ ,
_Dictyocaulus viviparous_ , _Haemonchus contortus_ , _Onchocerca volvulus_ ,
_Necator americanus_ , _Dirofilaria immitis_ , _Oesphagostomum dentatum_ ,
_Toxocara canis,_ and _Toxocara cati_ ([Chapter 43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)).
_A. suum_ is a parasitic intestinal nematode of pigs. Like _C. elegans_ , the
_A. suum_ N-glycans are paucimannose-rich and contain phosphorylcholine and
core fucose residues. In contrast, the N-glycans of the parasitic nematode of
deer _Parelaphostrongylus tenuis_ are extensively terminally modified with
galactose and carry the terminal structure Galα1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R. The cattle
parasite _D. viviparous_ has N-glycans with Lewis antigens (see [Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)), including Lewis x. The sheep parasite _H.
contortus_ synthesizes N-glycans containing the fucosylated LacdiNAc antigen
GalNAcβ1-4(Fucα1-3)GlcNAc-R ([Chapter 43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)). Nematodes
also make unusual glycolipids, and it is likely that each type of nematode
synthesizes different glycolipid structures. One of the best-studied nematodes
in terms of glycolipids is _A. suum_. Many of these glycolipids, which also
contain the arthroseries, have galactose and fucose modifications, in addition
to phosphorylcholine and phosphorylethanolamine. Virtually nothing is known
about the genetics regulating glycosylation in these parasitic nematodes, as
most studies have focused on the analysis of N- and O-glycans and some
glycolipids.

The authors acknowledge contributions to the previous version of this chapter
from Jeffrey D. Esko and helpful comments and suggestions from Katharina
Paschinger, Sarah Baas Robinson, Kristian Saied-Santiago, and Eillen Tecle.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.026

This chapter describes glycosylation in the Arthropoda, focusing primarily on
_Drosophila melanogaster_. The major glycan classes are similar to those
described in vertebrates, with interesting differences. The powerful genetic
systems available for studying gene function in _D. melanogaster_ have proved
to be effective means for understanding glycan function in early development
and have provided some of the first examples of how glycans affect growth
factor signaling, morphogen gradients, protein secretion, and neural function
in vivo.

Arthropods are among the most successful species on Earth and are found in all
types of environments. One of their characteristic features is an exoskeleton
composed of chitin, which provides support and physical protection. The best-
studied example is the fruit fly, _D. melanogaster_. In 1910, T.H. Morgan
published the first paper about the genetics of _D. melanogaster_ , which
showed that white eye color was a sex-linked trait. Since then, this organism
has been the predominant model organism for genetic analysis in animals. Its
advantages include an easily studied developmental program, a sequenced and
actively annotated genome, a relatively complex neural system, and the ability
to discern literally thousands of different phenotypes in morphology,
development, and behavior.

In pursuit of genes that regulate development, many Drosophila geneticists ran
head-on into glycobiology. New analytical techniques have expanded the
appreciation for the glycan synthetic capacity of the organism and have helped
establish links between interesting phenotypes and altered glycan expression.
Some of these associations have proven to be common across species and others
are unique to _D. melanogaster_. Given the complexity of glycosylation in
Drosophila, it is impossible to cover all aspects of glycans and glycan-
binding proteins in this organism. Instead, we provide an overview of the
major classes of arthropod glycans and examples of how studying glycans in
Drosophila can lead to new discoveries that impact vertebrate as well as
invertebrate biology.

Although it was once thought that arthropod glycoproteins were exclusively of
the high-mannose or paucimannose type ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)),
annotation of the _D. melanogaster_ genome predicted the existence of the
enzymatic machinery needed to generate hybrid and complex glycans. Moreover,
improved analytic techniques allowed the detection of very minor glycans. The
commercial and experimental demand for eukaryotic expression systems led to
the characterization of the glycosylation pathways of cells derived from the
moth _Spodoptera frugiperda_ (Sf9 cells) and from _D. melanogaster_ (S2
cells). It is now clear that high-mannose and paucimannose glycans account for
>90% of the total N-linked glycan complexity in Drosophila and other insects
throughout their life cycles. However, hybrid and complex glycans, including
sialylated, sulfated, and glucuronylated structures, are present as minor
components ([Figure
26.1](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f1/?report=objectonly)).

Drosophila adds fucose (Fuc) in both α1-3 and α1-6–linkages to the reducing
terminal _N_ -acetylglucosamine, whereas vertebrates restrict this linkage to
α1-6. Fucα1-3GlcNAc is immunogenic in humans and rabbits, resulting in the
production of antibodies against the so-called horseradish peroxidase (HRP)
epitope. Anti-HRP antibodies show that the Fucα1-3GlcNAc epitope is restricted
primarily to neural tissue in a broad range of arthropods. Drosophila does not
extend its core Fuc residues with additional capping monosaccharides, nor
modify its N-linked glycans by O-methylation, both of which occur extensively
in _Caenorhabditis elegans_ ([Chapter 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)). The
demonstration of fucosylated, sialylated, sulfated, hybrid, biantennary
complex, and triantennary complex glycans in all stages of the _D.
melanogaster_ life cycle makes the diversity of the arthropod N-glycans
generally comparable to that of mammals ([Chapter 27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)),
except for the very limited use of sialic acids (Sias).

The relative paucity of complex N-linked glycans in Drosophila has been
attributed at least partially to the presence of a hexosaminidase in the
secretory pathway. Encoded by the _fused lobes_ ( _fdl_ ) gene, the enzyme is
capable of efficiently removing GlcNAc residues that are added by
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (GlcNAcT-I encoded by _mgat1_ ) to the
nonreducing terminal Manα1-3 arm of the Man5GlcNAc2 core glycan. GlcNAcT-I
catalyzes the first committed step toward the generation of hybrid or complex
glycans ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Therefore, removal of this _N_
-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) residue effectively blocks subsequent extension
reactions, generating the observed predominance of high-mannose or
paucimannose glycans on glycoproteins.

The presence of hybrid and complex glycans in Drosophila predicts the
existence of specific enzymes that act on acceptor substrates that have
escaped trimming by GlcNAcT-I. For instance, α1-6 fucosyltransferase,
GlcNAcT-I, -II, -III, -IV, galactosyltransferase (GaltT), and
sialyltransferase (SiaT) activities are required to generate structures more
complex than paucimannose glycans. Of these enzymes, only GlcNAcT-I and the
single SiaT are reasonably well characterized.
[Genome](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/genome/) annotations predict the
existence of the other enzymes, although their activity and expression have
not been characterized.

Phenotypes have been described for mutations in key N-linked glycan processing
and synthetic enzymes ([Table
26.1](/books/NBK453045/table/CH26TB1/?report=objectonly)). Loss of the Golgi-
trimming enzyme, α1-2-mannosidase (Golgi mannosidase I, _mas1_ ) has little or
no impact on the processing of high-mannose glycans, which led to the
identification of an alternate mannosidase activity that effectively bypasses
loss of mannosidase I. However, the embryonic peripheral nervous system, the
wing, and the adult eye show mild alterations in the Drosophila _mas1_ mutant,
suggesting that the bypass is not complete in all tissues, similar to the
tissue-specific bypass identified in mouse following targeted disruption of
mouse α1-6-mannosidase ( _mGMII_ , Golgi mannosidase II) ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). To date, relatively few mutations in genes
affecting core N-linked glycosylation have been reported in Drosophila. One
exception is the glucosyltransferase Alg5, which adds glucose (Glc) to the
Dol-P-GlcNAc2Man9 precursor. Mutations in the Drosophila Alg5 gene, known as
_wollknäuel_ ( _wol_ ), show deficient protein secretion, extracellular matrix
deposition, and cuticle elaboration, phenotypes that reflect inefficient
protein glycosylation and altered endoplasmic reticulum (ER) function.

Mutations in genes responsible for subsequent processing steps have begun to
reveal the importance of glycan complexity in Drosophila. Reduction in the
activity of the Fdl hexosaminidase results in altered brain structure. Brain
lobes, normally separated in wild-type adults, are fused together through a
continuous stalk at the midline in _fdl_ mutants, hence, the original name of
the mutation, _fused lobe_ ([Figure
26.2](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f2/?report=objectonly)). In the wild-type
adult, the separated lobes form portions of the mushroom body, a brain
structure whose function has been implicated in Drosophila learning and
memory. In an interesting convergence, a null mutation in _mgat1_ generates an
apparently identical fused-lobe phenotype, although the glycan expression
profile shifts from more complex in _fdl_ mutants to high mannose and
paucimannose in _mgat1_ mutants. It is still unclear how loss of complex
glycans in one case ( _mgat1_ ) or enrichment of complex glycans in another
case ( _fdl_ ) generates the same neural phenotype. _mgat1_ mutants also show
reduced locomotor activity and decreased life span. The decreased life span is
rescued by reexpression of the enzyme in neural tissue alone, indicating an
essential role for complex glycosylation in neural functions that impact whole
organism physiology.

A terminal synthetic step in the production of N-linked glycans in mammals is
the addition of Sia residues. Genomic annotation and biochemical studies have
shown that Drosophila possesses some, but not all, of the biosynthetic
machinery necessary for the production of CMP-NeuAc. A single SiaT identified
in Drosophila shows a two-fold preference for transferring Sia to a LacdiNAc
(GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc) more than a type II LacNAc (Galβ1-4GlcNAc) acceptor.
However, the only identified sialylated N-linked glycans in Drosophila possess
subterminal LacNAc instead of LacdiNAc, despite the presence of LacdiNAc
terminated N-linked glycans in the organism. SiaT is detected in a very small
number of neurons beginning in late embryonic stages, but expands to a larger
number of central nervous system (CNS) neurons in larval and adult stages. The
relatively restricted expression of the SiaT enzyme reinforces proposals that
minor glycans may be restricted to small subsets of cells in specific
developmental or adult stages ([Chapter 7](/books/n/glyco3/ch7/)). In fact,
loss of glycoprotein sialylation results in explicit neurologic defects in
adult flies, including behavioral abnormalities and temperature-induced
seizures, indicating the importance of this minor modification of complex
glycans for normal neurophysiological function.

Insects add glycans in O-linkage to serine and threonine residues on secreted,
cell-surface, and intracellular proteins. Structural complexity ranges from
single monosaccharides ( _N_ -acetylgalactosamine, GlcNAc, mannose (Man), Glc,
or Fuc to extensively modified glycosaminoglycan chains) (see below). The
core-1 structure (Galβ1-3GalNAcβ-Thr/Ser), which is found extensively on
vertebrate mucin-like proteins ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)), has also
been described in insects ([Figure
26.3](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f3/?report=objectonly)). As much as 40% of
the total mass of these proteins is contributed by glycan. In Drosophila
tissues, peanut agglutinin and mucin-specific antibodies reveal
developmentally regulated and spatially restricted expression of
Galβ1-3GalNAcα-O-protein moieties.

Drosophila possesses a family of 12 polypeptide
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases (ppGalNAcT encoded by _pgant_ genes; [Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). Systematic mutational and siRNA knockdown
analysis of individual _pgant_ genes showed that _pgant4_ , _5_ , _7_ , and
_35A_ are essential. Loss of _pgant3_ impacts integrin-mediated cell adhesion
during development, and _pgant4_ modulates proteolytic cleavage of substrates
essential for Golgi trafficking. Thus, mucin-type O-glycosylation in
Drosophila regulates essential developmental programs and modulates
trafficking through the secretory pathway, providing blueprints for studying
similar functions in vertebrate systems.

Once initiated by a ppGalNAcT enzyme, the extension of mucin type glycans in
Drosophila results in the production of three different core structures. Core
1 structures predominate, but core 2 glycans are also present, as well as an
incompletely defined HexNAc-HexNAc core. Each core type can be modified by the
addition of glucuronic acid (GlcA), either as a terminal or branching residue.
GlcA is also detected as an internal residue within an extended chain,
reminiscent of a glycosaminoglycan (GAG) disaccharide structural unit
([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) and dystroglycan ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). In Drosophila and mosquito, sulfated mucin type
glycans are also detected. Species-specific expression also exists with regard
to the relative abundance of different core structures and the existence of
specific postsynthetic modifications. For example, O-glycans can be decorated
with ethanolamine in phosphodiester linkage to HexNAc residues in mosquito and
wasp species, but not in Drosophila.

Other types of O-linked glycan modifications are also present in insects. The
discovery that O-GlcNAc decorates protein components of the Drosophila
polytene chromosome added weight to initial demonstrations of the existence of
nucleocytoplasmic glycosylation in animal cells ([Chapters
18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/) and [19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Subsequently,
this finding was reinforced by the observation that the gene encoding the
O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), was affected in super sex combs ( _sxc_ ) mutants.
The _sxc_ locus is one of several polycomb group (PcG) genes that function as
homeotic regulators of gene expression along the antero-posterior axis during
Drosophila development. In a dramatic convergence of independent studies,
major sites of PcG binding along the Drosophila genome were also shown to be
major sites of genomic O-GlcNAc modification, indicating that addition of
O-GlcNAc to DNA-binding proteins regulates their genomic binding specificity.

O-linked Man, a modification that contributes to the pathophysiology of some
human muscular dystrophies ([Chapters 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/) and
[45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)), is also predicted to be present in Drosophila
based on sequence similarity of two transferase genes. Mutations in either of
these two genes, _rotated abdomen_ ( _rt_ ) or _twisted_ ( _tw_ ), cause
clockwise helical rotations of abdominal morphology in adult flies. The two
genes interact such that the abdominal rotation observed in compound mutants
is more severe than that of either single mutant, and that Rt and Tw proteins
must be expressed together in the same cell to achieve transfer of Man onto
dystroglycan, a physiologic acceptor for O-mannosylation.

Addition of a simple glycan, O-linked Fuc, modulates complex developmental
signals. The _notch_ gene was first identified and characterized in Drosophila
as encoding a large, multimodular receptor protein involved in cell-fate
determination. One characteristic of [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/notch/) is the presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like modules.
The EGF-like domain modules in the human Notch homolog have been shown to
contain three domain-specific types of O-linked glycosylation (O-Glc, O-Fuc,
and O-Xyl), which have been implicated in Notch's interactions with its
ligands, Delta and Serrate/Jagged ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). As in
mouse and humans, Drosophila possesses a protein O-glucosyltransferase, Rumi,
and two protein O-fucosyltransferases, Ofut-1 and Ofut-2. As in vertebrates,
Drosophila Ofut-1 transfers Fuc to EGF-like domains and Ofut-2 transfers Fuc
to thrombospondin receptor repeats on different sets of proteins. Loss of
Ofut-1 in Drosophila yields _notch_ mutant phenotypes, indicating that
fucosylation of Notch is essential for ligand-induced activation ([Figure
26.4A](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f4/?report=objectonly)–C). Loss of Rumi
also produces Notch-like phenotypes, but in a temperature-sensitive manner,
leading to the hypothesis that O-glucosylation is important for cleavage of
Notch by appropriate processing enzymes. In Drosophila and vertebrate
organisms, O-linked Glc residues are extended by the addition of Xyl residues
([Figure 26.3](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f3/?report=objectonly)). Rumi
possesses dual nucleotide sugar donor specificity, allowing it to transfer
either Glc or Xyl to serine/threonine residues in specific sequence contexts.

Fucosylated [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) is a substrate for an
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases encoded by the _fringe_ gene. Elongation of
O-linked Fuc with GlcNAc yields Notch protein that is more efficiently
activated by Delta than by Serrate/Jagged ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). Therefore, O-linked glycosylation functions as a
switch that activates the Notch receptor and alters its ligand preference.
Differential Notch activation by cell-specific expression of Ofut-1 and
[Fringe](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/fringe/) generates distinct cell fate
choices that lead to pattern formation in the embryo. The ability of the
Drosophila Ofut-1 and Fringe proteins to rescue or modify Notch protein or
_notch_ mutant phenotypes is well documented in cultured cells and in whole
embryos, although the demonstration of O-Fuc or the GlcNAc-extended
disaccharide on Notch protein extracted from Drosophila tissue has not yet
been achieved. In mice and humans, but apparently not in Drosophila, the
disaccharide can be extended by the addition of galactose (Gal) and then
capped with Sia ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). Drosophila embryos,
larvae, and imaginal tissues also contain GlcNAcβ-3Fuc core structures
branched by addition of a GlcA to Fuc ([Figure
26.3](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f3/?report=objectonly)). The functional
importance of the glucuronyl branching in Drosophila is not yet known.

Drosophila has the complete set of heparan sulfate (HS) biosynthetic and
modifying enzymes found in mammalian species, and produces complex HS
structures, but has only one gene for each class of these enzymes.
Disaccharide profiling of GAGs from Drosophila showed the presence of HS and
chondroitin sulfate (CS) remarkably similar in structure to that of GAGs found
in vertebrates ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). The principal
disaccharide species of HS-derived units include N-, 2-O, and 6-O sulfated
forms, and mono-, di-, and trisulfated disaccharides. CS detected from whole
embryos or larvae is largely unsulfated or 4-O-sulfated, but 6-O-sulfated
disaccharides have been detected as well. The covalent attachment of GAG
chains to proteins via the canonical tetrasaccharide linker (GlcA-Gal-Gal-Xyl)
has also been shown for Drosophila. CS and HS has been documented in many
other arthropod species, establishing the conservation of these macromolecules
throughout this phylum. In contrast, Drosophila and presumably other
arthropods do not produce hyaluronan ([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)).
Many of the HS-bearing proteoglycan core proteins known from vertebrate
systems are also represented in Drosophila. Drosophila has a single syndecan (
_sdc_ ) gene, two glypicans, division abnormally delayed ( _dally_ ) and
dally-like protein ( _dlp_ ), testican ( _cow_ ), and perlecan, which is
encoded by the terribly reduced optic lobe ( _trol_ ) gene. Homologs of
vertebrate or _C. elegans_ CS proteoglycans are not present in Drosophila and
the identity of CS proteoglycan core proteins in any arthropod has not yet
been determined.

Mutations affecting GAG biosynthesis and modification have provided important
insights concerning proteoglycan biosynthesis and development. For example,
loss of the single N-deacetylase–N-sulfotransferase gene in Drosophila ( _sfl_
) results in essentially an unsulfated polymer, N-acetylheparosan, which
causes defective patterning decisions orchestrated by several growth factors.
Both _Ext1_ \- and _Ext2_ -related genes, _ttv_ and _sotv_ , are required for
HS polymerization in Drosophila. Mutations affecting the single _Hs2st_ or
_Hs6st_ genes have particularly interesting effects. Loss of _Hs2st_
eliminates 2-O sulfate groups as expected, but results in compensatory
increases in 6-O-sulfation. The converse is also true; loss of _Hs6st_
produces a polymer lacking 6-O-sulfate groups but 2-O-sulfation and
N-sulfation increase, retaining the overall sulfation state of the polymer.
Compensation between 2-O and 6-O modifications has also been observed in CHO
cell mutants and mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from _Hs2st_ mutants. HS
and CS biosynthesis are also linked in a compensatory fashion; mutations that
reduce, but do not eliminate, Ext activity required for HS polymerization
increase the net amount of chondroitin polymer formed, similar to observations
made in vertebrate systems. These in vivo data suggest an important conserved
mechanism for retaining the activity of proteoglycans in vivo.

Genetic studies in Drosophila showed that GAGs are critical for signaling
mediated by a number of growth factors during development. HS proteoglycans
serve as coreceptors for many growth factors, including Wingless (Wg; a Wnt
ortholog), Decapentaplegic (Dpp; a BMP4 ortholog), fibroblast growth factor
(FGF), and Hedgehog (Hh), and affect their distribution and signaling ([Table
26.1](/books/NBK453045/table/CH26TB1/?report=objectonly)). For example,
patches of cells that express Dally at high levels showed markedly elevated
levels of Dpp signaling in a cell-autonomous manner. Overexpression of Dally
may increase Dpp protein levels on the cell surface by disrupting receptor-
mediated internalization and degradation.

The ability of HS proteoglycans to alter the distribution and levels of growth
factors in the matrix has biological significance because many of these
secreted proteins are morphogens, secreted protein factors that show graded
distributions across tissues and provide an essential mechanism for generating
cell diversity during tissue assembly. Morphogen activity has been shown in
vivo for Wg, Dpp, and Hh in Drosophila. HS proteoglycans not only affect their
levels in tissues, but are also integrated into regulatory circuits of the
morphogen systems. For example, both expression of a Dpp receptor (Thickvein)
and Dally, a coreceptor for Dpp, are negatively regulated by Dpp signaling.
This feedback system provides a mechanism to adjust cellular responses in the
face of inappropriate reductions in Dpp signaling, that might arise from
genetic or environmental perturbations.

Recent studies have highlighted the role of the glypicans in organ size
control in the context of evolutionary developmental biology. Halteres, which
contribute to body balance during flight, are characteristic of two-winged
Dipteran species, like Drosophila, and have evolved from the hindwings of
four-winged ancestral species. This knob-like structure is much smaller than
the ancestral wing from which it evolved. The size difference between the two
appendages is controlled by a Hox gene, _Ultrabithorax_ ( _Ubx_ ), which
regulates haltere identity. In the haltere disc, Ubx directly represses
expression of the _dally_ gene, limiting the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling and, thereby, organ size. Hox control of morphogen signaling through
HS proteoglycan gene expression is one of the general mechanisms used across
animal evolution to modify homologous organ structures.

HS proteoglycans are an evolutionarily conserved, universal component of stem
cell niches. In the ovarian germline stem cell (GSC) niche, Dally regulates
stem cell number by acting as a niche size determinant. The cells that
constitute the niche produce Dpp, which acts on a GSC that is in direct
contact with a niche cell. One of the daughter cells arising from the division
of a GSC will retain this contact and maintain its stem cell character. The
other daughter cell, which loses this contact, will differentiate. Dally
expressed in niche cells acts as a “trans” coreceptor, stabilizing Dpp and
presenting Dpp to GSCs that are in direct contact with the niche cell ([Figure
26.5](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f5/?report=objectonly)). In _dally_
mutants, Dpp signaling in GSCs is impaired and GSCs are lost to
differentiation. In contrast, _dally_ overexpression in a somatic cell
population outside the niche results in ectopic activation of Dpp signaling in
germ cells in this region, leading to an expansion of GSC-like cells. Thus,
contact-dependent signaling by HS proteoglycans provides a mechanism to define
the physical space of the niche and to control stem cell number.

The essential requirement for proteoglycans in neural development has also
been illuminated by genetic analysis in Drosophila. Syndecan (Sdc) regulates
axon guidance by modulating Slit-Robo signaling in the embryonic CNS. Dally-
like (Dlp) also influences nervous system development but has distinct
functions from Sdc. Sdc affects axon guidance decisions near the midline of
the nervous system, whereas Dlp is required for fascicle formation at a
distance from the midline. Trol regulates embryonic motor axon guidance by
facilitating transmembrane signaling mediated by Semaphorin–Plexin
interactions. HS proteoglycans also regulate synaptogenesis at the
neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Both Sdc and Dlp bind to LAR, a receptor
tyrosine phosphatase, which controls NMJ growth and active zone morphogenesis.
As in axon guidance, these two proteoglycans have distinct functions: Sdc
promotes the growth of presynaptic terminals, whereas Dlp regulates active
zone formation. Trol regulates the formation of both pre- and postsynaptic
structures by localizing Wg protein.

[Chitin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/chitin/), a polymer of (GlcNAcβ4)n, is
one of the most abundant biopolymers on Earth, second only to cellulose (which
is interestingly a (Glcβ4) _n_ , polymer and synthesized in a similar manner,
by extrusion at the cell surface). Chitin is a major component of the rigid,
cuticular exoskeleton of all Arthropoda, and therefore these animals expend
considerable resources toward its assembly. Chitin fibrils also form a more
subtle, protective layer at the apical surface of gut epithelial cells (the
peritrophic membrane) and in the lumen of the forming tracheal system. Elegant
genetic screens have shown that mutations in genes necessary for chitin
polymerization, modification, and disassembly affect tracheal morphology
([Table 26.1](/books/NBK453045/table/CH26TB1/?report=objectonly)). The
potential for chitin or for small chitin-based oligosaccharides to modulate
cell signaling and morphogenesis remains unexplored in Drosophila.

Insects were once classified as “animals without gangliosides” in reference to
sialylated glycosphingolipids (GSLs) found broadly distributed in animal
families other than the arthropods ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)).
However, arthropods possess their own family of GSLs, designated as the
arthroseries. Sialylated GSLs (gangliosides) have not been found in
Drosophila, but the arthroseries glycolipids contain GlcA rather than Sia, and
like many of the ganglioside Sias, the GlcA is linked to a terminal Gal
residue ([Figure 26.6](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f6/?report=objectonly)).

Vertebrates generally build GSLs on a lactosylceramide core (Galβ1-4Glcβ-
ceramide). In contrast, the arthropods add a Man residue to Glcβ-Cer to
generate a core (Manβ1-4Glcβ-ceramide), called “mactosylceramide.” Addition of
the next two monosaccharides, GlcNAc in β1-3 linkage to the underlying Man and
a terminal GalNAc in β1-4 linkage, produces a substrate for the addition of
ethanolamine-phosphate (EthNP) to C-6 of GlcNAc (EthNP-6GlcNAcβ1-3Manβ1-4Glcβ-
Cer). Therefore, the neutral core of most arthroseries glycolipids is more
correctly described as zwitterionic rather than neutral. Arthroseries cores
with more than one GlcNAc residue are found with 0, 1, or 2 EthNP groups. The
functional significance of EthNP modification is currently unknown.

Additional species-specific core diversity has also been identified. For
example, the arthroseries triosylceramide in Drosophila can be alternatively
extended with Gal rather than _N_ -acetylgalactosamine, followed by addition
of GlcA ([Figure 26.6](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f6/?report=objectonly)).
Other arthropod species add Gal to mactosylceramide or to the arthroseries
tetraosylceramide with subsequent capping and EthNP modification ([Figure
26.6](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f6/?report=objectonly)). The expanding
diversity of alternative core extensions detected in arthropods provides a
larger pool of structural variants from which these organisms can tailor GSL
expression for specific developmental or tissue-restricted functions, similar
to core switching in vertebrate species ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)).

Mutations that affect the first steps in Drosophila GSL synthesis were
originally identified as modulators of cell fate. Biochemical analysis showed
that genes called _egghead_ ( _egh_ ) and _brainiac_ ( _brn_ ), respectively,
encode the mannosyltransferase and N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase that add
the second and third monosaccharide residues ([Figure
26.6](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f6/?report=objectonly)). Phenotypes
associated with loss of maternal and zygotic _egh_ and _brn_ result in
overproliferation of neural cells at the expense of epithelial lineages. These
_egh/brn_ phenotypes closely resemble mutations in the _notch_ gene ([Figure
26.4](/books/NBK453045/figure/ch26.f4/?report=objectonly)). An additional
phenotype of _egh_ mutants is the formation of enlarged peripheral nerves due
to glial cell overproliferation with immune cell infiltration, reminiscent of
the human disorder neurofibromatosis type 1. As in this human disorder,
overgrowth results from enhanced phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase activity,
likely because of reduced ras signaling. The neurofibromatosis-like phenotypes
indicate the importance of the membrane glycolipid environment for propagating
appropriate transmembrane signals. Mutations affecting the two partially
redundant N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases that generate the
tetraosylceramide of the arthroseries result in subtle behavioral phenotypes
in larvae and altered EGF receptor signaling in ovarian follicle cells, but
otherwise produce viable, fertile adults. It remains to be determined whether
arthroseries glycans elongated beyond the tetraosylceramide possess structural
information that imparts specific function.

Annotation of the Drosophila genome indicates the presence of representatives
for each of the known classes of animal lectins ([Chapter
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)). Intracellular carbohydrate-binding proteins,
which in vertebrates are associated with protein folding and quality control
in the ER or with trafficking through the early compartments of the secretory
pathway (calnexin, calreticulin, VIP, ERGIC-53), are also found in Drosophila
([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). Further downstream, lysosomal targeting
is mediated by LERP, a sorting protein functionally similar to the vertebrate
mannose-6-phosphate receptor ([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). Although
LERP possesses domain architecture and sequence similarity to the P-type
lectin sequences of the mannose-6-phosphate receptor, its binding does not
appear to be glycan-dependent, suggesting evolutionary divergence in the
mechanisms that control the biogenesis of lysosomes. The binding specificities
and functions of insect family members of the Galectin ([Chapter
36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)), C-type ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), and
I-type lectin families ([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)) are not well
characterized. For example, the protein encoded by the _furrowed_ gene, a
putative C-type lectin with significant homology with vertebrate selectins,
has been implicated in planar cell polarity dynamics during eye development,
but this activity is independent of its carbohydrate recognition domain
([CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)).

Current classification schemes for animal lectins reflect the long history of
studying glycan-binding proteins in vertebrates ([Chapter
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)). However, a handful of lectin activities, first
identified in Drosophila, challenge the comprehensiveness of current animal
lectin designations. One of these was identified in a search for secreted
proteins that stimulate the proliferation and motility of imaginal disc cells.
The imaginal disc growth factor (IDGF) family members are structurally related
to chitinases but lack amino acid residues essential for catalytic activity.
It has been suggested that the IDGF family has evolved away from hydrolysis
while maintaining a glycan-binding activity that facilitates mitogenic and
trophic support. Another currently unclassified lectin, called “gliolectin,”
was identified in a screen of Drosophila cDNAs for proteins that mediate cell
adhesion to immobilized glycans. Gliolectin is expressed in a subset of
embryonic glial cells found at the midline of the developing CNS and in cells
at the dorsal/ventral boundary of the wing imaginal disc. Mutants that lack
gliolectin show defects in axonal pathfinding, consistent with a role for
glycan-mediated cell adhesion in facilitating the transmission of signals
between cells. They also show notch-like phenotypes in wing development,
indicating a broader role for gliolectin in establishing tissue boundaries.
Finally, the _mind-the-gap_ gene encodes a protein (MTG) that possesses domain
folds consistent with its ability to bind GlcNAc, although a definitive
structural or functional homolog among well-defined lectin families is yet to
be determined. In Drosophila larvae, MTG participates in organizing the
glycoprotein matrix at the larval neuromuscular junction.

Genetic and biochemical approaches have identified multiple nucleotide sugar
transport activities in Drosophila. For several of these genes, glycomic, and
other phenotypic consequences associated with knockdown or loss-of-function
have been characterized ([Table
26.1](/books/NBK453045/table/CH26TB1/?report=objectonly)). For others, further
analysis is needed to define their specificity and function. The first
nucleotide sugar transporters identified in Drosophila were recovered as
mutants from genetic screens that targeted phenotypes associated with altered
morphogen or growth factor signaling and, therefore, impacted GAG expression.
[Fringe](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/fringe/) connection ( _frc_ ) and Slalom
( _sll_ ) are responsible for the transport of UDP-GlcA, UDP-GlcNAc, UDP-Xyl,
and the sulfation donor PAPS, each of which is essential for GAG biosynthesis.
Other transport activities that function in important developmental pathways
include GFR/Nac and Efr, which transport GDP-Fuc into the Golgi and ER,
respectively. Loss of these transport activities impact
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) signaling and neural-specific
glycan expression. Other transporter genes are also associated with
developmental phenotypes but their transport specificities require further
analysis ([Table 26.1](/books/NBK453045/table/CH26TB1/?report=objectonly)).

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Scott Selleck and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Simone
Kurz, Chi-Huang Lin, Nickita Mehta, Sarah Baas Robinson, and Robert Townley.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.027

This chapter discusses some general features of glycosylation and glycan-
binding interactions in a few species that belong to the deuterostome lineage,
with particular emphasis on sea urchins, frogs, zebrafish, and mice. These
organisms provide excellent models for studying the functions of glycans in
development and physiology.

Animal evolution split into two major lineages ∼500–600 million years ago—the
deuterostomes and the protostomes ([Chapter 20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)). The
superphylum Deuterostomia contains the major phyla of Echinodermata (sea
urchins and starfish), Hemichordata (acorn worms), Urochordata (ascidians),
Cephalochordata (amphioxus), and Vertebrata (fish, amphibia, reptiles, birds,
and mammals). In deuterostomes, cell divisions of the zygote occur by radial
cleavage, and cell fates are not precisely determined. Another characteristic
feature is that the first opening to form in the blastula becomes the anus and
the second opening becomes the mouth. The other superphylum, the Protostomia,
contains the major phyla of Porifera (corals and sponges), Cnidara (anemones
and hydra), Annelida (segmented worms), Mollusca (clams, oysters, snails, and
slugs), and Arthropoda (insects, spiders, and crustacea). In protostomes,
unlike deuterostomes, cell division during early development occurs in a
highly organized manner and cell fate is precisely determined. Examples of
protostome model organisms include the nematode _Caenorhabditis elegans_
([Chapter 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)) and the arthropod _Drosophila
melanogaster_ ([Chapter 26](/books/n/glyco3/ch26/)).

Deuterostomes have been extensively studied because of their relatedness to
humans and because they provide excellent model systems for understanding
vertebrate biology. Sea urchins, frogs, zebrafish, and mice have received the
most attention and each provides certain advantages for studying functions of
glycans in reproduction, early development, or adult physiology. In numerous
instances, these models have revealed aspects of glycobiology that were later
confirmed in more evolutionarily distant organisms, and they often serve as
excellent models for understanding human disease. Challenges exist, however,
in describing the glycomes of the more ancient deuterostomes, mainly because
of poor genome annotation, ignorance of individual glycosyltransferase
substrates, and the presence of glycans with unusual structures. Each of these
models is briefly described below with references to other sections of the
book for additional details.

Sea urchin glycans involved in fertilization have been studied extensively. In
fact, much of what we know about the biochemistry of fertilization was first
discovered in this organism ([Figure
27.1](/books/NBK453076/figure/ch27.f1/?report=objectonly)), and the
information subsequently applied to mammalian sperm–egg interactions. One of
the advantages of studying fertilization in sea urchins is that eggs and sperm
are easy to obtain in large quantities. Because fertilization occurs outside
the adult body, it is also easy to experimentally manipulate sperm and eggs.

Sea urchin eggs are covered by a hydrated jelly coat. About 80% of the weight
of egg jelly is a high-molecular-weight linear fucose (Fuc) sulfate polymer
(FSP), which has a molecular mass of >106 Da.
[Receptor](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/receptor/) proteins on sperm bind to
FSP, triggering the opening of two pharmacologically distinct calcium channels
that induce the exocytosis of the sperm's acrosome vesicle (the “acrosome
reaction”). The ionic mechanisms that trigger the acrosome reaction are
conserved in mammals, but the nature of the sperm surface receptors varies.
FSP is a species-selective inducer of the sea urchin sperm acrosomal reaction.
FSP consists of linear α1-3Fuc polymers. Individual fucoses are sulfated
differently, and most FSPs are made of tri- or tetrasaccharide repeats. The
number of fucoses per repeat, the linkage, and sulfation patterns, all help
ensure species selectivity for induction of the acrosome reaction. About 20%
of the egg jelly mass is a large glycoprotein containing a unique polymer of
sialic acid (Sia), which can be released from crude sea urchin egg jelly by
treatment with mild base (β-elimination). The sialoglycan has a novel
structure—[Neu5Gcα2–5-O-glycolylNeu5Gc]n. However, its receptor on the sperm
membrane is unknown. When sea urchin sperm undergo the acrosome reaction, a
protein named bindin is released from the acrosomal vesicle. Bindin cements
the sperm to a large egg surface glycoprotein named egg bindin receptor 1
(EBR1). Bindin can agglutinate mammalian red blood cells much like plant
lectins ([Chapter 32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/)), and glycopeptide fragments of
unfertilized eggs can block bindin-induced red cell agglutination. Bindin is
thought to recognize glycans on EBR1. EBR1 itself has lectin-like domains, but
its glycan ligands are unknown.

Most studies of glycosylation in sea urchin have identified
glycosyltransferase activities and the glycans they synthesize. To investigate
roles for glycans and glycan-binding proteins (GBPs) using genetic strategies
in sea urchin, antisense morpholinos or short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) to knock
down gene expression have been the methods of choice, but these will likely be
superseded by more precise gene editing techniques such as the clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/Cas9 (CRISPR/Cas9) strategy or
transcription activator–like effector (TALE) nucleases (TALENs). A few
echinoderm genomes have been sequenced (Echinobase), but as with most
organisms, relating glycosylation activities to genes is not straightforward
([Chapter 8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)).

The African clawed frog, _Xenopus laevis_ , is a well-established model
organism for studying fertilization and embryonic development ([Figure
27.2](/books/NBK453076/figure/ch27.f2/?report=objectonly)). Adults are easy to
maintain and can be induced to lay eggs up to three times a year by injection
of human chorionic gonadotropin. The very large eggs allow easy microinjection
experiments to express exogenous cDNAs encoding RNAs and proteins of interest.
In addition, frog embryos develop quickly. However, the generation time for
adults is long (1–2 yr), and the frog genome is tetraploid, making genetic
studies difficult. Nevertheless, as for sea urchin, inhibition of gene
expression has been accomplished by injection of antisense morpholinos or
shRNAs into early embryos. However, these techniques suffer from off-target
effects and the future will see a shift to gene editing strategies including
CRISPR/Cas9 and TALENs. In addition _,_ in situ hybridization and
overexpression techniques have been used in _Xenopus_ embryos. For example,
the functions of two polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases in
transforming growth factor-β/bone morphogenic protein signaling were
distinguished, showing that this organism is useful for discovering glycan
biosynthetic steps and mechanisms by which glycans regulate development.

_X. laevis_ oocyte cortical granules contain a lectin called XL35, which is
released at fertilization and binds to glycoproteins expressing mucin-type
O-glycans (Galα1-3GalNAc) in the jelly surrounding the egg. XL35 is an
oligomer made up of monomers, each of which has a molecular weight of 35 kDa.
Light scattering experiments showed that the oligomer exists primarily as a
12-mer, allowing it to cross-link its glycoprotein ligands in the egg jelly to
form a relatively rigid layer on the fertilization envelope. This molecular
complex functions to block polyspermy, and also serves as a barrier against
microbial infection. Based on the XL35 predicted amino acid sequence, a family
of lectins homologous to XL35 has been identified with members in some of the
most primitive deuterostomes, such as the sea squirt, but also in more complex
vertebrates such as zebrafish, mice, and humans. This family was named the
“X-lectins” because of its discovery in _Xenopus_. [Figure
27.2](/books/NBK453076/figure/ch27.f2/?report=objectonly) shows a dendrogram
of some of the X-lectins. Mice and humans have two orthologs termed
intelectins-1 and -2 because of their initial discovery in the intestines. It
is interesting to note that the sea squirt homolog ( _Halocynthia roretzi_ )
shows a similar monomeric molecular weight to human intelectin 1 (Hint-1), and
is 34% identical at the amino acid level. Hint-1 exists as a trimer when
secreted from goblet cells in intestinal and respiratory epithelia. IL-13, a
cytokine involved in the type TII innate immune response, induces a remarkable
increase in Hint-1 transcripts. Constitutively expressed transcripts for
Hint-1 are also found in heart tissue. Hint-2, in contrast, is only expressed
in Paneth cells that function in immune surveillance in the crypts of the
small intestine. [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) microarray
results show that both Hints bind to the glycans of a unique set of human
pathogenic bacteria that have in common the presence of _cis_ -diols on their
outer surface polysaccharides. It is becoming clear that the X-lectin family
plays key roles in deuterostome innate immune responses against pathogens.

Zebrafish ( _Danio rerio_ ) provides an excellent model organism for
understanding the function of genes in early vertebrate development ([Figure
27.3](/books/NBK453076/figure/ch27.f3/?report=objectonly)). Females lay
several hundred eggs weekly and the eggs undergo external fertilization.
Embryos develop rapidly (in hours), and their translucence allows
visualization of early development. Zebrafish are relatively easy to maintain
compared with other vertebrate species. Furthermore, they can be mutagenized
and outbred to produce mutant strains, or manipulated using morpholinos,
shRNAs, or CRISPR/Cas9 and TALEN methodologies to silence or delete genes
permanently or transiently during early development ([Figure
27.3](/books/NBK453076/figure/ch27.f3/?report=objectonly)).

All major glycan classes present in mammals have been described in zebrafish
and many of them have been manipulated genetically, yielding new insights into
glycan functions. Because zebrafish live in a nonterrestrial environment and
because widespread gene duplications and diversification occurred during
teleost evolution, it is expected that novel glycans, pathways of assembly,
and biological activities will also be discovered in this organism.

Sophisticated screening methods for the identification of novel mutants that
affect specific physiological systems may be applied to zebrafish. For
example, high-throughput screenings have identified groups of genes required
for fin development and regeneration, which serve as models for cartilage and
bone development in mammals. Mutants altered in vascular development and
hemostasis have been identified as well. Moreover, the ability to identify
novel genes in the system and manipulate glycan expression via gene silencing
or mutation is making this model organism a focus of studies in vertebrate
glycobiology. Functions of particular protein- and lipid-bound glycans have
been uncovered; for example, the _slytherin_ mutant that contains a missense
mutation affecting GDP-fucose biosynthesis causes several phenotypes impacting
neuronal differentiation. Knockdown of genes that regulate polysialylation
show the critical function of polysialic acid for neuronal migration and
plasticity, including those that may involve motor neurons in somite formation
and differentiation. Significant contributions have also been made in the
understanding of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) biosynthesis and function during
development. Furthermore, the modeling of several human congenital disorders
of glycosylation in zebrafish has provided insights into the phenotypes
associated with these disorders, including defects in the synthesis of
O-mannose glycans ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)) that give rise to
forms of muscular dystrophy ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

Laboratory mice ( _Mus musculus_ ) are the most studied deuterostome because
they are mammals most closely related to primates, reproduce quickly, and
their genes can be readily manipulated. Inbred mouse strains are rife, and
spontaneous mutations occur that have specific morphological or
pathophysiological phenotypes. Examples of the latter include brachymorphic
mice, which are partially deficient in synthesis of PAPS, the universal
sulfate donor ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)), resulting in shortened
limbs because of defective chondroitin sulfate (CS) synthesis during
endochondral ossification ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Another
example is a mutation causing muscular dystrophy, which was traced to _Large_
_myd_ , a glycosyltransferase that when defective in humans also causes
muscular dystrophy (see [Chapters 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/) and
[45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). Much information about mouse glycobiology comes
from the use of homologous recombination methods to knockout a specific gene
systemically, in specific tissues or at selected times in development ([Online
Appendix 27A](/books/n/glyco3/app_glycosylation/)). In numerous cases, human
pathological mutations have been engineered into conserved murine homologous
genes to generate models for disease ([Chapter 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)).
Notably, humans lack two glycan biosynthetic enzymes that are found in mice:
the galactosyltransferase that synthesizes Galα1-3Gal that can terminate N- or
O-glycans ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)), and the CMP-Neu5Ac
hydroxylase that synthesizes N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc) from CMP-
Neu5Ac ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) and mice lack the ABH(O) blood
group glycans of humans ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)).

Because gene deletion has been used to inactivate numerous genes involved in
glycosylation, only a few mutants are mentioned here. Mutant lines have been
created in early genes involved in the assembly of all the major subclasses of
vertebrate glycans. In most cases, these mutations prevent initiation of the
biosynthetic pathways and show embryonic lethality. These include the O-GlcNAc
transferase OGT ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)), whose deletion is
lethal even at the single cell stage. Loss of the entire N-glycan pathway
caused by ablation of phosphomannomutase 2 (which generates mannose-1-P and
all mannose-containing glycans), and loss of GlcNAc-1-P transferase (which
initiates the lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor; [Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) are lethal within a few days of fertilization. Loss
of heparan sulfate (HS) biosynthesis due to deletion of _Ext1_ or _Ext2_ is
also lethal at the E6–7 stage because of a failure to differentiate mesoderm.
Systemic deletion of MGAT1 ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) is lethal
around midgestation (E9–10) showing that early development through
gastrulation can proceed in the complete absence of hybrid and complex
N-glycans. CS and hyaluronan synthesis are essential for embryonic development
as well, and developmental arrest occurs during limb generation and
organogenesis. Because there are more than 20 partially redundant polypeptide
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases in mouse, knocking out the [O-GalNAc
glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/) pathway ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) completely has not been possible. However,
deletion of the single copy core-1 galactosyltransferase C1GALT1, which
generates Galβ1-3GalNAcα-O-Ser/Thr, is lethal by stage E14 because of abnormal
angiogenesis. Knocking out the protein O-fucosyltransferase POFUT1 that
modifies epidermal growth factor (EGF) modules in
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) is lethal and causes
developmental defects similar to those seen in global Notch pathway knockout
mice. Absence of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors ([Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)) or O-mannose glycans ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)) also result in embryonic lethality.

Mutations in genes that encode glycosyltransferases which extend core glycans
in each class of glycan usually have less severe phenotypes than those
deleting entire pathways. For example, some glycosyltransferase gene knockouts
affect the immune system, including leukocyte rolling, lymphocyte homing, and
T-cell homeostasis. Knocking out sequential biosynthetic steps or multiple,
seemingly redundant, genes frequently reveals another layer of glycan-
dependent functions, novel structures, and unrecognized biosynthetic pathways.
Many mouse mutants serve as models of human genetic disorders ([Chapter
41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)).

To study the function of glycans in specific tissues, tissue-specific lesions
in a gene can be created by crossing strains bearing conditional null alleles
to strains that selectively delete the gene only in those tissues of interest.
The most common method is to flank a portion of the gene with _loxP_
recombination sites and then mate these mice to a strain that produces
bacteriophage Cre-recombinase under the control of a tissue-specific or
inducible promoter ([Figure
27.4](/books/NBK453076/figure/ch27.f4/?report=objectonly)). When activated,
the Cre-recombinase recognizes the _loxP_ sites and excises the DNA segment
contained between them. These techniques can be combined with an environmental
stress, dietary modification, or inflammatory challenge to delete genes in
both a cell type-specific and temporally regulated fashion.

Sometimes, altering a gene can have a highly specific effect on a given tissue
without affecting other tissues because of the unforeseen presence of related
isozymes. For example, α-mannosidase II (MAN2A1) was thought to have the
dominant role in N-glycan processing (see [Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)),
but mice lacking MAN2A1 survive and have a dyserythropoietic anemia. These
mice produce many unusual glycans from the abnormally high levels of
incomplete precursors that accumulate and drive the synthesis of atypical
products. The mutant mice eventually develop a progressive autoimmune
nephropathy, accumulating immune complexes in the kidney tubules, probably in
response to the abnormal glycan antigens. Their erythrocytes lack complex
N-glycans, but other tissues continue to produce them using a different
isozyme called α-mannosidase IIx (MAN2A2). Mice lacking MAN2A2 are mostly
unaffected, but male mutant mice are sterile because spermatocytes fail to
make a glycan required for their binding to Sertoli cells in the testes,
blocking spermatogenesis. Deletion of both α-mannosidases prevents synthesis
of all complex N-glycans ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)), and most embryos
die between E15 and E18, or shortly after birth from respiratory failure.

Determining the effect of a mutant gene is usually done in highly inbred
strains that are genetically identical except for the gene in question.
Sometimes, the phenotype of a mutation changes according to the genetic
background (mouse strain) in which the mutation is expressed. For instance,
mice lacking N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase II (MGAT2), an enzyme required
for complex N-glycan synthesis ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) die after
birth in one genetic background, but in another, rare survivors survive with
severe gastrointestinal, hematological, and osteogenic abnormalities.
Interestingly, these mutants phenocopy the human disorder, CDG-IIa, in which
patients lack the same enzyme ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). As
another example, lines deficient in global fucosylation due to mutations in
the enzyme that converts GDP-mannose to GDP-fucose ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)) die as embryos, but when bred into a different
background, they survive until birth and can then be maintained on a fucose-
supplemented diet. A third example is the formation of bony outgrowths
(exostoses) in the growth plates of endochondral bones. In one background,
heterozygous mutations in the Ext-1 copolymerase involved in HS biosynthesis
cause infrequent exostoses, whereas in another background, the incidence of
tumors increases severalfold. These experiments suggest the existence of
modifiers that alter the expression level of an enzyme or the assembly of
substrate, that salvage sugars from the diet, or that alter glycan turnover.

In some mutants, phenotypes are only evident under environmental challenge.
For example, deletion of both enzymes responsible for polysialic acid
synthesis produces “no-fear” mice that tend to be more aggressive and ignore
normally stressful or anxiety-producing situations. Deletion of syndecan-1, a
major HS core protein ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), gives no obvious
changes under normal laboratory conditions, but the mice are more resistant to
bacterial lung infections. Apparently, bacteria exploit the shed syndecan in
the lung to enhance their virulence and modulate host defenses.

Mice deficient in the synthesis of ganglioside GM3 appear to be fairly normal
except for enhanced insulin sensitivity, as well as deafness due to inner ear
hair cell defects. These mice shunt glycosphingolipid synthesis toward more
complex gangliosides that substitute for GM3 loss ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). On the other hand, double-mutant mice that
synthesize only ganglioside GM3 show tonic–clonic (epileptic) seizures, and
90% die in response to sharp sounds. These examples show the importance of
having the correct balance of glycans. They also show how phenotypes depend to
a large extent on other genetic factors, diet, and environmental cues. Another
major factor affecting the phenotype is now thought to be the microbiome,
especially in the gut. Thus, mutations that appear silent in a controlled
laboratory setting may elicit a strong phenotype in a more natural
environment.

Studies of humans and other primates have been limited by cost, ethical
controversies, and (in the case of humans) genetically outbred populations.
However, there are increasing examples in which findings (especially
therapeutic ones) in mice fail to translate to the human conditions. Even
chimpanzees (our closest relatives) seem to have markedly different disease
profiles. Although ethically and practically feasible studies on other
primates should continue, Nobel laureate Sydney Brenner has suggested
([Chapter 7](/books/n/glyco3/ch7/)) that we now have enough information about
humans to consider ourselves to be a viable “model organism” for in-depth
study.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Victor Vacquier and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Wu Di and
Kristina Mlinac-Jerković.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.028

This chapter provides an overview of naturally occurring glycan-binding
proteins (GBPs), the history of their discovery, some of their biological
functions, ways in which GBPs are identified, and challenges in defining their
biologically relevant ligands. The chapters that follow describe the analysis
of glycan–protein interactions ([Chapter 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)), the
physical principles involved ([Chapter 30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)), and the
structures and biological functions of important subclasses of GBPs ([Chapters
31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)–[38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)).

GBPs (which exclude glycan-specific antibodies) are found in all living
organisms, and fall into two overarching groups—lectins and sulfated
glycosaminoglycan (GAG)-binding proteins (compared in [Online Appendix
28A](/books/n/glyco3/app_gbp/)). Lectins are further classified into
evolutionarily-related families identified by carbohydrate-recognition domains
(CRDs) based on primary and/or three-dimensional structural similarities
([Figure 28.1](/books/NBK453061/figure/ch28.f1/?report=objectonly)). CRDs can
exist as stand-alone proteins or as domains within larger multidomain
proteins. They typically recognize terminal groups on glycans, which fit into
shallow but well-defined binding pockets ([Chapters 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)
and [30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)). In contrast, proteins that bind to sulfated
GAGs (heparan, chondroitin, dermatan, and keratan sulfates; [Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) do so via clusters of positively charged amino
acids that bind specific arrangements of carboxylic acid and sulfate groups
along GAG chains. Most of these proteins are evolutionarily unrelated. GBPs
that bind to the nonsulfated GAG hyaluronic acid (hyaladherins) share an
evolutionarily conserved fold that facilitates recognition of short segments
of the invariant hyaluronan repeating disaccharide ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)), so they are best classified as lectins rather
than grouped with sulfated GAG-binding proteins. The rest of this chapter
emphasizes lectins, different families of which are detailed in [Chapters
31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)–[37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/). Sulfated GAG-binding
proteins are also discussed, and are detailed further in [Chapter
38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/).

Lectins were discovered in plants in 1888 when extracts of castor bean seeds
were found to agglutinate animal red blood cells. Subsequently, seeds of many
plants were found to contain such “agglutinins,” later renamed lectins (Latin
for “select”) when they were found to distinguish human
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) blood groups ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)), important for blood transfusions. Lectins are
particularly common in the seeds of leguminous plants and these “L-type”
lectins, including concanavalin A and phytohemagglutinin, have been
extensively studied. Although their specific glycan-binding activities make
such plant lectins extremely useful scientific tools, their biological
functions in plants remain mostly unknown.

The first animal lectin discovered was the asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR)
identified by Anatol Morell and Gilbert Ashwell in the late 1960s during
investigations of the turnover of a serum glycoprotein, ceruloplasmin. Like
most glycoproteins circulating in blood, ceruloplasmin has complex N-glycans
with sialic acid termini. To prepare radiolabeled ceruloplasmin, the terminal
sialic acids were removed, leaving an exposed galactose. Surprisingly,
asialoceruloplasmin had a circulation half-life (in rabbits) of minutes
whereas intact ceruloplasmin remained in the blood for hours. Glycoproteins
with exposed Gal residues were rapidly cleared into liver cells via an
endocytic cell-surface receptor that specifically bound to terminal β–linked
Gal or GalNAc. ASGPR was purified by affinity chromatography using a column of
immobilized asialoglycoprotein.

Other glycan-specific receptors involved in glycoprotein clearance and
targeting were subsequently discovered, including mannose 6-phosphate
receptors for targeting lysosomal enzymes to the lysosomes and mannose
receptors that clear glycoproteins with terminal mannose or GlcNAc residues
from the blood. Small soluble lectins specific for β-linked galactose (now
called “galectins”; [Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)) were isolated by
affinity chromatography of extracts from many biological sources ranging from
the slime mold _Dictyostelium discoideum_ to mammalian tissues. By the 1980s,
the concept of vertebrate lectins that recognize specific glycans was well
established. Although the first animal lectins identified were specific for
endogenous glycans, many lectins specific for exogenous glycans of
microorganisms were later found. Lectins recognizing exogenous glycans include
soluble proteins that circulate in the blood of many species as well as
membrane-bound receptors on cells of the immune system.

Lectins and sulfated GAG-binding proteins are also widespread in
microorganisms, although they tend to be called by other names such as
hemagglutinins and adhesins. The influenza virus hemagglutinin, which binds to
sialic acid on host cells ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) was the first
GBP isolated from a microorganism. The viral hemagglutinins, like many plant
lectins, can agglutinate red blood cells. Many bacterial lectins have been
described. They fall into two general classes: adhesins on bacterial surfaces
that recognize glycans on host cell surface glycolipids, glycoproteins, or
GAGs to facilitate bacterial adhesion and colonization, and secreted bacterial
toxins that bind to host cell surface glycolipids or glycoproteins ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)).

A large group of GBPs that defy classification based on sequence or structure
recognize sulfated GAGs ([Chapter 38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). The best-
studied example is the interaction of heparin with antithrombin.
[Heparin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/heparin/) was discovered in 1916 by Jay
McLean, as a medical student, but it was not until 1939 that heparin was shown
to be an anticoagulant in the presence of “heparin cofactor,” which was then
identified as antithrombin in the 1950s. Many other sulfated GAG-binding
proteins were later discovered by affinity chromatography using columns of
immobilized heparin. Growth factors and cytokines bearing clusters of
positively charged amino acids along their protein surface interact with
sulfated GAGs in a looser fashion—that is, they do not always show the high
specificity seen with antithrombin. However, in some cases, specific GAG
sequences mediate the formation of higher-order complexes, acting as a
template for oligomerization or positioning of proteins such as fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) and its cell-surface receptor.

GBPs function in communication between cells in multicellular organisms and in
interactions between microbes and hosts and can also be involved in binding
growth factors or cytokines. These interactions can take various forms,
resulting in movement of molecules, cells, and information.

Directing movement of glycoproteins within and between cells is a common
function for lectins in many organisms. In eukaryotic cells, including yeast
as well as higher eukaryotes, several groups of lectins are important in
glycoprotein biosynthesis and intracellular movement ([Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), two lectins,
calnexin and calreticulin bind monoglucosylated high-mannose glycans present
on newly synthesized glycoproteins, forming part of a quality control system
for protein folding. This binding keeps proteins in the ER until they are
correctly folded. Other groups of lectins in the ER, including M-type lectins
and proteins containing mannose 6-phosphate receptor homology domains take
part in the process of ER-associated glycoprotein degradation (ERAD), binding
partially processed high-mannose glycans on terminally misfolded
glycoproteins, causing them to be retrotranslocated into the cytoplasm for
deglycosylation, followed by degradation in the proteasome. One of the best
characterized functions of GBPs is in delivery of newly synthesized lysosomal
enzymes from the _trans_ -Golgi to lysosomes. [P-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ptypelectins/) ([Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)) recognize mannose 6-phosphate residues that have
been added to N-glycans on lysosomal enzymes in the Golgi apparatus, targeting
them to endosomes for fusion with lysosomes.

Once released from cells, glycoproteins can also be taken up for degradation
in lysosomes. As noted above, the ASGPR on mammalian hepatocytes controls
turnover of many serum glycoproteins by recognition of terminal Gal or GalNAc
residues. Similarly, the mannose receptor on macrophages and sinusoidal cells
of the liver binds and clears glycoproteins with oligomannose N-glycans that
are released from cells during inflammation and tissue damage.

Not all lectin-mediated targeting leads to degradation.
[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/)-binding subunits of secreted
bacterial and plant toxins typically target them to glycolipids on cell
surfaces and facilitate entry of the toxins into cells ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Many enzymes contain glycan-binding domains that
bring another domain with enzyme activity into close proximity with its
substrates. One notable group includes bacterial cellulases in which
cellulose-binding modules position the enzymatic domain for optimal
degradation of cellulose fibers. Using a similar principle, GalNAc-binding
domains in polypeptide-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases that initiate
O-linked glycosylation in animals position these enzymes to add further GalNAc
residues to regions of polypeptides that already bear O-glycans ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)).

Distinctive glycans on the surfaces of different eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cells make them targets for GBPs. Binding of glycans on the surface of one
cell by GBPs on another cell can induce recognition and adhesion, whereas
crosslinking glycans on different cells by multivalent soluble lectins
provides an alternative mechanism. Such interactions are exploited in
specialized situations exemplified by transient contacts between moving cells.
The selectins, three receptors that function in interactions between white
blood cells, platelets, and endothelia, provide the best characterized example
of lectin–glycan interactions in cell–cell adhesion ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). For example, L-selectin on lymphocytes binds
glycans on specialized endothelial cells of lymph nodes to induce lymphocyte
homing, wherein circulating lymphocytes leave the blood stream and enter the
lymph node. Other mammalian GBPs that mediate binding of cells to each other
or that recognize ligands on the same cell surface include
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)) and galectins ([Chapter
36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). Lectins in multicellular organisms also mediate
interactions between cells and the extracellular matrix and support the
organization of matrix components. For example, proteins containing link
modules that bind specifically to hyaluronan in cartilage (and other tissues)
are essential for structuring the extracellular matrix ([Chapter
38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)), and other extracellular proteins bind to sulfated
GAGs to organize cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions ([Chapter
38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)).

Many bacteria also use lectins to adhere to glycans on host cells, often
keeping them from getting washed away. These adhesins are usually present at
the ends of long structures called pili or fimbriae that project from the
surface of the bacteria ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Adhesion can be
part of the infection process. For example, a mannose-specific adhesin on
pathogenic strains of _Escherichia coli_ that cause urinary infections binds
to epithelial cells of the urinary tract. Other glycan–protein interactions
between host cells and bacteria provide a mechanism for coexistence. Several
bacterial species that are part of the normal gut flora, including
nonpathogenic _E. coli,_ use adhesins to bind to glycolipids present on cells
lining the large intestine.

Many lectins are involved in immune responses, in invertebrates as well as in
“lower” vertebrates and mammals. Differences between glycans on host and
microbial cell surfaces are commonly the basis for innate immune responses.
Phagocytosis is a common outcome of the binding of macrophage lectins to non-
host glycans on bacteria and fungi. Other lectins circulating in the blood,
such as serum mannose-binding protein and ficolins, bind to pathogen cell
surfaces and activate the complement cascade, leading to complement-mediated
killing.

Binding of glycans to lectins on immune cells can also trigger intracellular
signaling that activates or suppresses cellular responses. Receptors that
recognize self-glycans such as sialic acid, as well as several that are
specific for glycans characteristic of microorganisms can initiate such
signaling. For example, binding of α2-6 linked Sia to CD22, a member of the
Siglec family of vertebrate lectins found on B-lymphocytes, initiates
signaling that inhibits activation to prevent self-reactivity ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). In contrast, binding of trehalose dimycolate, a
glycolipid found in the cell wall of _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ by the
macrophage C-type lectin Mincle, induces a signaling pathway that causes the
macrophage to secrete proinflammatory cytokines.

Finally, viruses often use their own GBPs to attach to host cells during
infection ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Proteins on virus surfaces,
including those on influenza virus, reovirus, Sendai virus, and polyomavirus,
bind to sialic acids. In addition to bringing the virus into contact with
their cell targets, these hemagglutinins typically induce membrane fusion,
facilitating virus entry and delivery of nucleic acids into the cytosol.
[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/)-binding receptors on viruses
are often highly specific for a particular linkage; human influenza virus
binds to sialic acids linked α2-6 to Gal, whereas bird influenza virus binds
to α2-3-linked sialic acid. Other viruses, such as herpes simplex virus, have
adhesins that bind to heparan sulfate proteoglycans on cell surfaces.

An important concept in identifying, defining, and classifying lectins is that
glycan-binding activity is embodied in discrete protein modules or domains,
referred to as CRDs. CRDs are typically independently folding segments of
proteins; often one can separate the glycan-binding activity from other
activities of the protein by expressing its [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) in isolation. In some cases, the CRDs
constitute the entire GBP ([Figure
28.2](/books/NBK453061/figure/ch28.f2/?report=objectonly)).

When a lectin is comprised simply of its [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/), its functions often are dependent on
multivalency, which endows lectins with the ability to cross-link glycan-
containing structures. This arrangement explains the ability of many plant
lectins to agglutinate cells and to cluster glycoproteins on cell surfaces,
which can induce mitogenesis. Other GBPs that function this way include the
galectins, which can bridge glycans on one cell surface or between cells.
Sometimes other activities are encoded within the structure of the same domain
that binds glycans; some cytokines comprised of a single folded domain may
have distinct sites for binding glycans and other target receptors. More
commonly, other activities of lectins reside in separate modules in
multidomain proteins ([Figure
28.2](/books/NBK453061/figure/ch28.f2/?report=objectonly)). Such arrangements
are widespread. The domains associated with CRDs perform many different
functions, including binding other types of ligands, performing enzymatic
reactions, anchoring proteins to membranes, and directing oligomerization.
GBPs often contain multiple modules, combining several functions in one
protein.

Membrane anchors in lectins take multiple forms, but they often span the
membrane, linking extracellular CRDs with cytoplasmic domains. This
arrangement facilitates the flow of information between glycan-binding sites
on the extracellular surface and the cytoplasm. Simple sequence motifs in the
cytoplasmic domains of transmembrane lectins often control trafficking of
receptors and their bound glycan ligands. Common functions of such
intracellular movements are internalization of cell-surface receptors,
directing bound ligands to endosomes and lysosomes, and movement through
intracellular compartments such as the ER and Golgi apparatus to the cell
surface. Flow of information in the opposite direction can lead to stimulation
of signaling complexes on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane in response to
binding of glycans at the cell surface.

Clustering of glycan-binding sites (multivalency) is often critical to both
recognition and biological functions and is achieved in different ways: by
formation of simple oligomers of CRDs, as a result of the presence of multiple
CRDs in a single receptor polypeptide, and through association of
[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)-containing polypeptides via
independent oligomerization domains. Some oligomers are stable, whereas
others, such as those formed by some galectins, are in equilibrium with
monomers. These arrangements facilitate multivalent binding to increase
avidity and direct the geometrical arrangement of binding sites. Multiple CRDs
may face in the same direction for surface recognition or in opposite
directions to facilitate crosslinking. [Multivalent](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/multivalent/) CRDs may have fixed spacing or flexible spacing to
accommodate different target glycans. In some cases, oligomerization domains
also form structural features, servings as stalks that project CRDs from the
cell surface. Oligomerization domains can also embody other functions, such as
the protease-binding sites in the collagen-like domains of mannose-binding
protein.

It is convenient to classify lectins based on the structures of the CRDs that
they contain ([Figure
28.3](/books/NBK453061/figure/ch28.f3/?report=objectonly)). CRDs are found in
a large number of different structural categories, indicating that many
different protein folds can accommodate glycan binding ([Chapter
30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)). Based on this observation, glycan recognition
must have evolved independently many times and the diversity of
[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)
structures must have arisen to address a diversity of functions.

GBPs appear across all kingdoms of life, but the types of lectins in each
kingdom vary considerably. Several families appear in both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, but their distributions suggest different evolutionary histories.
The malectin domain, although conserved in structure and widely distributed in
prokaryotes, plants, and animals, is found in proteins with distinct domain
organization and different functions in the three groups. Animal malectin is a
membrane-anchored [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) of the ER that binds N-linked glycans
during glycoprotein biosynthesis. In plants, the malectin CRD is expressed at
the cell surface and is linked to a cytoplasmic kinase domain. Bacterial
malectins consist of CRDs associated with glycohydrolase domains. Similarly,
R-type CRDs ([Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)) in plants form the cell-
surface-binding component of toxins such as ricin and are linked to
glycohydrolase genes in bacteria, but in animals they appear in two distinct
contexts: in polypeptide-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases that initiate
O-GalNAc glycans ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) and in the mannose
receptor family. Although these CRDs have been adapted to serve different
functions in different kingdoms, a glycan-binding function appears to have
evolved early and been preserved in subsequent lineages.

In contrast to CRDs with broad evolutionary distribution, two other groups of
lectins have sporadic distributions. B-lectin domains, which are broadly
distributed in bacteria in association with hydrolase domains, are found as
isolated or tandem CRDs in monocot plants but not in other plants, in bony
fishes but not in other animals, and in some fungi. The recently identified
F-type lectins appear in a few bacterial species and several lower
vertebrates, but have not been found in mammals. In these cases, the presence
of related domains in evolutionarily distant species may reflect lateral gene
transfer rather than the presence of a precursor lectin in the distant common
ancestor that they share. A different pattern of evolution is observed for
PA14 domains, the only other type of [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) found in both bacteria and eukaryotes.
Although the PA14 fold is relatively widespread, suggesting that it originated
early and was retained across species, only a subset have been shown to have
glycan-binding activity: CRDs associated with bacterial glycohydrolases and in
adhesins and flocculation factors on the surface of yeast.

The intracellular sorting lectins mentioned earlier, such as calnexin,
calreticulin, and M-type lectins, are the most broadly distributed lectins
that evolved from a common eukaryotic ancestor. Their distribution and the
conservation of their functions probably reflect an ancient and conserved role
in intracellular trafficking of glycoproteins in eukaryotes. Two other groups
of CRDs appear to be found in metazoans but not simpler eukaryotes. The L-type
CRDs have diverged in function between animals, in which they function in
intracellular glycoprotein sorting and trafficking, and plants, in which they
serve a protective function ([Chapter 32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/)). Chitinase-
like glycan-binding domains across a range of species retain the ability to
bind polymers of GlcNAc, but their biological functions are not well
understood, so it is unclear if they have shared roles in plants and animals.

In addition to the widely distributed families, certain
[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) families
are evolutionarily restricted. In addition to animal-specific and vertebrate-
specific lectin groups, there are also groups such as the [I-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/itypelectins/) found only in mammals
([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). The pattern of evolution of animal-
specific lectins varies. [Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/)
seem to be similar in organization in vertebrates and invertebrates and it may
be possible to identify orthologs in quite diverse species ([Chapter
36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). In contrast, C-type CRDs have undergone
independent radiation in vertebrates and invertebrates, and identifying
orthologs even between mouse and human proteins in some cases is difficult
([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Of the 12 different protein folds found
in plant lectins, nine appear to be unique to plants. It is also noteworthy
that viruses seem to have developed their own approaches to binding glycans
rather than borrowing from hosts ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)).

In addition to families of proteins that share evolutionarily related CRDs,
there are individual proteins that bind glycans through domains that are not
related to CRDs in other proteins. Examples include proteins with dedicated
glycan-binding domains, such as some laminin G domains that recognize glycans
on α-dystroglycan ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)), pentraxins that bind
modified and phosphorylated glycans, and macrophage αMβ2 integrin that binds
fungal glucans and exposed GlcNAc residues on glycoproteins. Other proteins
bind to glycans through domains that also have other ligands: annexin V binds
bisecting GlcNAc residues as well as phospholipids, and several cytokines have
been reported to bind glycans as well as nonglycan receptors. Sulfated-GAG-
binding proteins have also largely evolved by convergent evolution.

There are multiple ways in which glycan recognition can be implicated in
specific biological processes. One common approach is to show the ability of
simple monosaccharides or small glycans to compete with a process. Information
can often also be gained by modifying glycans on cells and glycoproteins with
enzymes that add or remove glycans, by genetic manipulation, and by chemical
inhibitors of glycan metabolism. These strategies have provided information
about the glycans involved—for example, those needed for virus or toxin
binding or those required for endocytosis of glycoproteins. Based on this
information, it is then possible to look for GBPs that target these particular
glycans, which can then be linked to the biological process.

The ability to bind specific glycans, assessed in various biochemical assays,
has often been the basis for direct identification of novel GBPs without
reference to a particular biological function. For example, galectins
([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)) share a binding preference for
β-galactosides and F-type lectins for fucosyl residues. In addition to forming
a basis for binding and competition assays, the binding activity is commonly
used as a means of isolating these proteins by using affinity chromatography
with appropriate immobilized glycan ligands. A wide variety of methods for
coupling monosaccharides and complex glycans to create affinity resins have
been developed. As mentioned above, many sulfated-GAG-binding proteins have
been discovered by affinity chromatography using immobilized GAG chains. A
limitation of these approaches is that binding activity does not directly
indicate a biological function and the roles of many well-characterized GBPs
have not been fully determined.

The observation that many lectins fall into structural families provides an
alternative way to identify novel GBPs through analysis of protein sequences.
Sequence motifs characteristic of CRDs are routinely used to screen sequences
from whole genome sequencing. These motifs can also be used to screen specific
cDNA and gene sequences of interest because of their association with
biological functions. Detection of an appropriate motif suggests the presence
of a [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/),
and structural knowledge of known glycan-binding sites can suggest whether a
novel protein is likely to retain glycan-binding activity. In some cases, it
can even suggest potential ligands. Such predictions often motivate testing
for glycan-binding activity, either by specifically examining binding to
predicted ligands or by screening more generally using glycan arrays.

Although structure-based predictions do not directly yield information about
biological function, the organization of CRDs and their association with other
domains often provide information about potential functions. This type of
top–down analysis is limited to discovery of GBPs that contain domains
resembling known CRDs. As glycan array screening becomes more widely
accessible, more broad-based screening can be envisioned.

Monosaccharides or small oligosaccharides in isolation tend to be low-affinity
ligands for GBPs, often with dissociation constants in the millimolar range.
These intrinsic affinities are enhanced in several ways ([Figure
28.4](/books/NBK453061/figure/ch28.f4/?report=objectonly)). At the level of
individual glycans, affinity can be enhanced by linking the glycan to other
types of structures. Conjugation of glycans to proteins and lipids can lead to
enhanced [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)
binding. For example, some GBPs such as the macrophage receptor Mincle bind to
glycolipids with much higher affinity than they bind to free oligosaccharides.
In this case, enhanced affinity can result from the presence of an extended or
accessory binding site in a CRD adjacent to the glycan-binding site, which is
able to accommodate the hydrophobic tail of the lipid. Other GBPs bind
selectively to a particular glycan conjugated to a specific polypeptide motif.
Optimal binding of P-selectin to the ligand PSGL-1 requires an O-linked glycan
bearing a sialyl Lewis x structure on a peptide with adjacent acidic residues
and sulfated tyrosines ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). In yet other
cases, glycan recognition is combined with other binding domains on a protein.
The mannose receptor contains C-type CRDs that bind high-mannose
oligosaccharides and a fibronectin type II repeat that binds to triple helical
polypeptides. Together, these two modalities facilitate binding to fragments
of collagen released at sites of inflammation.

A major determinant of binding to natural lectin ligands is often the
interaction of multivalent glycans with clustered CRDs, resulting in high-
avidity binding. [Ligand](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ligand/) clustering can
result from multiple binding epitopes in a single oligosaccharide or
polysaccharide, multiple glycans attached to a single protein scaffold or the
presence of adjacent glycoproteins or glycolipids in a cell membrane.
Similarly, [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) clustering can reflect multiple CRDs
in a single polypeptide, formation of polypeptide oligomers that each contains
a single CRD, or from clustering of CRD-containing proteins in the cell
membrane. Each of these levels of CRD organization has the potential to place
geometrical constraints on the optimal arrangement of ligands, depending on
the degree to which CRDs are held in a fixed arrangement or are flexibly
linked. Clustering of glycans attached to a single polypeptide, particularly
in heavily O-glycosylated proteins such as mucins, can also affect their
ability to take on different conformations. Because lectins typically interact
with a single conformation, there is an entropic penalty associated with
binding any one of these which may be reduced when the glycan has fewer
potential conformations. In vitro biochemical assays, including glycan arrays,
reflect only some of these types of clustering of CRDs and ligands, so they
must be interpreted with some caution. In some cases, binding of a CRD to
isolated glycans may be essentially undetectable even though binding of the
intact CRD-containing protein to its endogenous glycoconjugate may be highly
selective and quite strong. Care must also be exercised in use of the term
ligand, to distinguish the glycan part of a ligand from the entire natural
glycoconjugate or even cell surface.

Based on the above considerations, GBPs may bind optimally to a glycan only
when it is conjugated to a particular protein or lipid. In such instances, the
GBP ligand is neither the glycan by itself nor the carrier by itself. Examples
include P-selectin, which binds to sialyl Lewis x adjacent to sulfated
tyrosines on the PSGL-1 protein of leukocytes (see above) and E-selectin,
which binds to the same glycan on a variant form of the protein CD44 on
hematopoietic stem cells (designated HCELL). Although the concept that GBPs
bind glycans in the context of their carriers is well established, there is no
standard terminology to designate a particular glycoform as the ligand for a
GBP. Stating that a protein (e.g., PSGL-1 or CD44) is “the ligand” for a GBP
(P-[Selectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/selectin/) and E-Selectin,
respectively) is inaccurate, in that the protein without the specific glycan
is not a ligand. However, giving a ligand a completely different name (e.g.,
HCELL) does not identify the polypeptide carrier. An option is to use a
superscript “L” (ligand) to designate these molecules as PSGL-1PSL and
CD44ESL, respectively. This terminology also has the advantage of
distinguishing different glycoforms of the same polypeptide as ligands for
different GBPs. For example, subsets of the glycoprotein CD24 recognized by
P-selectin and Siglec-10 can be designated as CD24PSL and CD24S10L,
respectively. Regardless of the nomenclature used, direct proof of a
functional interaction in vivo is needed to definitively assign a particular
glycoprotein or glycolipid as a physiological GBP ligand.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Richard Cummings and Jeffrey Esko and appreciate helpful comments and
suggestions from Lingquan Deng, Yuki Ohkawa, Paeton L. Wantuch, and Ryan
Weiss.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.029

Glycans interact with many types of proteins including enzymes, antibodies,
and lectins. Protein recognition of glycans represents a major way in which
the information contained in glycan structures is deciphered and promotes
biological activities. This chapter describes approaches to study the kinetics
and thermodynamics of interactions between glycans and glycan-binding proteins
(GBPs).

A tremendous variety of GBPs are known and many are discussed in [Chapter
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/) and elsewhere in this book. GBPs differ in the
types of glycans they recognize and in their binding affinity and kinetics.
The underlying structural basis by which a GBP binds with specificity and high
affinity to a very limited number of glycans (or even a single glycan) among
the many thousands that are produced by a cell is discussed in [Chapter
30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/). A wide variety of physical techniques are used to
identify and quantify protein–glycan interactions. Differential affinities of
glycans for different GBPs revealed by these approaches provide insight into
the biological roles of glycans and their cognate GBPs. Characterization of
protein–glycan recognition using such techniques, in combination with
structural studies by nuclear magnetic resonance
([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) and
crystallography, may be used to identify novel antagonists or inhibitors of
GBPs. Such approaches were used, for example, to develop inhibitors of
neuraminidases to treat influenza virus infections ([Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)) and to screen for high-affinity inhibitors of
selectins for the treatment of inflammatory disorders ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).

Much of the initial work on understanding protein–glycan interactions came
from studies on the combining sites of plant lectins and antibodies against
specific blood group antigens. These studies led to the development of
quantitative assays using glycans to inhibit binding interactions detected by
precipitation and agglutination, which provided early evidence for the
importance of specific sugar structures in biological recognition events.
Studies of protein–glycan interactions were instrumental in the development of
techniques such as equilibrium dialysis and isothermal titration calorimetry,
which are now widely used to analyze protein binding to a variety of types of
ligands. On the other hand, methods used to study other types of
protein–ligand interactions often need to be adapted to accommodate the
specific properties of glycans and the proteins that interact with them.

Because many GBPs are oligomeric, with each subunit typically having a single
carbohydrate-binding domain (carbohydrate-recognition domain
[[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)]), many
GBPs show multivalent interactions with glycan ligands. Thus, although the CRD
within a GBP may have a particular affinity for a ligand, the multivalent
feature enhances binding through increased avidity and allows ligand cross-
linking. Although the term _affinity_ in this case, measured at equilibrium as
a dissociation constant or _affinity_ Kd, refers to the direct interaction of
a single CRD with a monovalent ligand, _avidity_ , measured as an _avidity_
Kd, refers to the overall strength of multivalent interactions ([Figure
29.1](/books/NBK453057/figure/ch29.f1/?report=objectonly)). Some researchers
use the term _apparent_ Kd to denote the nonequilibrium nature of the
measurements. Examples of oligomeric and multivalent GBPs include galectins,
which are soluble GBPs that associate in dimers and higher oligomers, and
soluble C-type lectins, such as serum collectins, which are oligomeric. In
fact, some GBPs, such as the mannose receptor and some galectins ([Chapters
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/) and [36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)), have multiple
CRDs within a single polypeptide and can bind multiple ligands. In such cases,
the single protein–glycan interaction may be weak (mm–μm Kd), as for the
mannose receptor, which binds α-linked mannose with affinity in the low
millimolar range, but which can bind with high avidity to the surface of fungi
or microbes rich in mannose-containing ligands.

Membrane receptors can also function as oligomeric complexes. For example, the
C-type lectin P-selectin, which is dimeric, and membrane
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) (Sia-binding immunoglobulin-
like lectins), both cluster on the cell surface in the presence of glycan
receptors on opposing cells. Similarly, influenza virus hemagglutinin is
trimeric and is present in multiple copies on a virion, whereas cholera toxin
contains a pentamer of glycan-binding B subunits associated with the catalytic
and toxic subunit A in an AB5 complex. The glycan of ganglioside GM1 binds
strongly to each B subunit of cholera toxin with high affinity because of
specific and multiple interactions within each [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) (affinity Kd of ∼40 nm). As a pentamer
in the AB5 form, cholera toxin has extremely high avidity (avidity Kd of ∼40
pm) for cells expressing GM1, which clusters at the cell surface.

Most plant lectins are dimers or tetramers and are thus multivalent. Of
course, the density of glycans on glycoproteins can also affect the affinity
of binding, as some glycoproteins carry multiple multiantennary N-linked
chains, each of which may interact with a [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) of the GBP ([Figure
29.1](/books/NBK453057/figure/ch29.f1/?report=objectonly)).

The interaction of glycans with GBPs can be described thermodynamically and
kinetically. Consider the simplest case in which a lectin (L) binds with a
single site to a glycan (G) with a single binding determinant in a monovalent
interaction. The interaction is governed by Equation 1 ([Figure
29.2](/books/NBK453057/figure/ch29.f2/?report=objectonly)). At equilibrium the
affinity constant, K, is defined as an association constant (or Ka) (Equation
2) and is equal to _k_ on/ _k_ off, and the inverse of the Ka is the Kd
(Equation 3). Like any equilibrium constant, K is related to the standard
free-energy change of the binding reaction at pH 7 (Δ _G_ o) in kcal per mole
(Equation 4), in which R is the gas constant (0.00198 kcal/mol-K) and T is the
absolute temperature (in °K). The affinity constant K is related to the
thermodynamic parameters Δ _G_ o, Δ _H_ o, and Δ _S_ o (Equation 4), which
represent the changes in free energy, enthalpy, and entropy of binding,
respectively.

The on-rate _k_ on is expressed in units of M−1sec−1 or M−1min−1, whereas _k_
off is expressed in units of sec−1 or min−1. Although it is important to
define Ka, _k_ on, _k_ off, Δ _G_ o, Δ _H_ o, and Δ _S_ o for each binding
phenomenon under consideration, investigators often discuss data in terms of
the Kd (Equation 3), because the units are in concentration (millimolar,
micromolar, nanomolar, etc.).

Whereas the binding of a monovalent GBP to a monovalent ligand is easily
defined by the equilibrium kinetics described above, binding between
multivalent ligands or GBPs involves multiple affinities, and the binding
equilibria are more complex and more accurately described by a set of
equilibrium constants. Typically, for multivalent ligands and GBPs, the values
reported for affinity are apparent affinity constants and usually measure
avidity.

There are many different ways to study the binding of glycans to proteins, and
each approach has its advantages and disadvantages in terms of thermodynamic
rigor, amounts of protein and glycan needed, and speed of analysis. Below is a
discussion of some of the major ways in which the binding between a glycan and
protein can be studied. Much of the available information about protein–glycan
interactions derives from studies of relatively small glycan ligands
interacting with a protein. In examining these interactions, two broad
categories of techniques have been applied: (1) kinetic and near-equilibrium
methods, such as equilibrium dialysis and titration calorimetry; and (2)
nonequilibrium methods, such as glycan microarray screening, hapten
inhibition, enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA)-based approaches, and
agglutination. In all of these approaches, the concepts of affinity versus
avidity must be considered, and because of the multivalency of many GBPs and
their ligands, it is difficult to precisely define the kinetic parameters,
although the apparent affinity and avidity remain very useful measurements.

Equilibrium dialysis is one of the earliest and simplest methods to study the
binding of a GBP to a glycan. Although the technique is not used that often
currently, understanding the principles of equilibrium dialysis helps to
clarify the concept of measuring equilibrium constants. A solution of a GBP,
such as a lectin or an antibody, is placed in a dialysis chamber of defined
volume; the chamber must be permeable to glycans or other small molecules but
not to the GBP. The chamber with the GBP inside is then placed in a larger
known volume of buffer that contains the glycan in the concentration range of
the expected Kd. After equilibrium is achieved, defined as no further changes
in concentrations of the glycan either inside or outside the chamber, the
total concentration of glycan in the chamber [In] is defined. [In] is a
combination of bound glycan (associated with the GBP) plus free glycan versus
the concentration of glycan outside the chamber [Out], which is the free
glycan only. This difference in glycan [In] and [Out] will depend on the
amount and affinity of the GBP. From this information, both the Ka and the
valence _n_ can be determined from the relationship

r/c=Kan−Kar,

(5)

in which _r_ is the molar ratio of glycan bound to GBP, and _c_ is the
concentration of unbound glycan [Out]. The concentration of bound glycan is
determined by subtracting [Out] from [In].

A plot of _r_ / _c_ versus _r_ for different hapten concentrations
approximates a straight line with a slope of −Ka. The valence of binding
(number of binding sites per mole) is defined by the _r_ intercept at an
infinite hapten concentration. If such an analysis were performed with cholera
toxin, for example, one would obtain five binding sites per mole of AB5
complex, or 1 mol per mole of B subunit. Nonlinear curve fitting is used to
determine equilibrium constants, because older methods using linear
conversions have inherent deficiencies and may distort experimental error.

As in any technique for determining binding constants, a number of important
assumptions are made and their validity must be considered. These include
demonstrating that the protein and glycan(s) are stable and active over the
course of the experiment, the glycan is freely diffusible, the complex is at
equilibrium, and structurally unrelated small molecules—not expected to
bind—show no apparent binding in the experimental setup. If such binding is
observed, this may be considered nonspecific and may be subtracted from the
specific binding.

There are several advantages to equilibrium dialysis: (1) the approach is
relatively easy and sophisticated equipment is not needed; (2) if the affinity
is high, then relatively small amounts of protein are needed (typically a few
milligrams); (3) if the affinity is high, only small amounts of glycan may be
required; (4) if the protein and glycan are very stable, they may be recovered
and reused; (5) radioactive or fluorescent-tagged glycans may be used; and (6)
reliable equilibrium measurements can be made. Some drawbacks of the approach
are that (1) it provides the Ka but not the rate constants ( _k_ on or _k_
off); (2) if the affinity of the GBP for the glycan is low, then relatively
large amounts of GBP and glycan may be required; and (3) many different
measurements must be made if the range of affinity is unknown and this may
require many days or weeks to complete.

A variation of this technique is illustrated by the equilibrium gel-filtration
method developed by Hummel and Dreyer. In the Hummel–Dreyer method, a GBP is
applied to a gel-filtration column that has been preequilibrated with a glycan
of interest that is easily detectable (e.g., by radioactive or fluorescent
tagging). As the protein binds to the ligand, a complex is formed that emerges
from the column as a “peak” above the baseline of ligand alone, followed by a
“trough” (where the concentration of ligand is decreased below the baseline)
that extends to the included or salt volume of the column. The amount of
complex formed is easily determined by the known specific activity of the
ligand. Because the amount of complex formed is directly proportional to the
amount of protein (or ligand) applied, it is easy to calculate a binding curve
from several different Hummel–Dreyer column profiles at different
concentrations of either protein or ligand. This binding curve allows the
calculation of the equilibrium constant of the interaction. The advantages and
drawbacks of this technique are generally the same as for equilibrium
dialysis, except that Hummel–Dreyer analyses are often quicker to perform and
can be used with ligands of many different sizes. Such an approach has been
invaluable in defining the equilibrium binding of selectins to their ligands.

In many cases, affinity chromatography is simply used to identify interacting
partners. In this technique, a GBP is immobilized to an affinity support, such
as Affi-Gel, CNBr-activated Sepharose, Ultralink, or some other activated
support. If a glycan binds tightly to an immobilized GBP, a buffer containing
a known glycan ligand may be added to force dissociation of the complex. For
example, oligomannose-type and hybrid-type N-glycans will bind avidly to an
agarose column containing the plant lectin concanavalin A (ConA-agarose) and
10–100 mm α-methyl mannoside is required to elute the bound material
efficiently. In contrast, many highly branched complex-type N-glycans will not
bind. Biantennary complex-type N-glycans bind to ConA-agarose, but they do not
bind as tightly as high-mannose-type N-glycans and their elution can be
effected using 10 mm α-methyl glucoside. In this manner, one can assess the
binding specificity of a GBP. In practice, this approach is rather crude, and
although it gives valuable practical information about the capacity of an
immobilized lectin to bind specific glycans, it does not provide quantitative
affinity measurements. A variant of this method is to immobilize the glycan
ligand through covalent linkage or by capturing a biotinylated glycan on a
streptavidin-linked surface and then measuring GBP binding.

A more sophisticated version of this approach, termed frontal affinity
chromatography, provides quantitative measurements of the equilibrium binding
constants. In this technique, a solution containing a glycan of known
concentration is continuously applied to a column of immobilized GBP, and the
elution front of the glycan from the column is monitored. Eventually, enough
ligand is added through continuous addition that its concentration in the
eluant equals that in the starting material. If the glycan has no affinity for
the GBP, it will elute in the void volume _V_ 0; if, however, the glycan
interacts with the GBP, it will elute after the _V_ 0 and at a volume _V_ f
([Figure 29.3](/books/NBK453057/figure/ch29.f3/?report=objectonly)).

The advantages of frontal affinity chromatography are similar to those
discussed for equilibrium dialysis: (1) the approach is easy and inexpensive;
(2) if the affinity is high, then relatively small amounts of protein are
needed (typically a few milligrams), and only a single column is required; (3)
correspondingly, small amounts of glycan may be used if the Kd is in the range
of 10 nm to 10 mm; (4) if the glycans are stable, they may be recovered and
reused; (5) radioactive glycans may be used; and (6) reliable equilibrium
measurements can be made. There are several drawbacks to this approach,
including (1) only the Kd can be derived, not _k_ on or _k_ off; (2) the
conjugation of the GBP to the matrix must be stable and the protein must
retain reasonable activity for many different column runs; (3) many different
column runs must be made with a single glycan; and (4) if the Kd is high (>1
mm), this approach is typically not feasible. Overall, frontal affinity
chromatography is quite useful and has now been automated.

Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) is one of the most rigorous means of
defining the equilibrium binding constant between a glycan and a GBP. The
binding of a glycan to the GBP is measured as a change in enthalpy using a
commercial microcalorimeter. In this technique, a solution containing a glycan
of interest is added in increments into a solution containing a fixed
concentration of GBP. The glycan is added at many intervals and the heat
evolved from binding is measured relative to a reference cell. Over the course
of the experiment, the concentration of glycan is increased in the mixing cell
over a glycan-to-GBP molar ratio of 0–10. The heat absorbed or evolved during
binding is determined and the data are replotted as kcal/mole of injectant
versus the molar ratio ([Figure
29.4](/books/NBK453057/figure/ch29.f4/?report=objectonly)). These data are
then analyzed by replotting data to obtain the Kd. The heat change is directly
related to the enthalpy of reaction Δ _H_ o. From knowledge of the Kd and Δ
_H_ o, and using Equation 4, it is possible to define the binding entropy Δ
_S_ o.

The major advantage of this approach is that it can provide thermodynamic
information about the binding of a glycan to a GBP and is thus superior to
equilibrium dialysis and affinity chromatography. The disadvantages of this
approach are that (1) relatively large amounts of protein may be required to
conduct multiple experiments (>10 mg); (2) relatively large amounts of glycans
may be required; and (3) because of the above-mentioned problem, it is not
typical for such analyses to use a wide range of different glycans.
Nevertheless, this approach is rigorous and if the titration cell dimensions
could be decreased in the future, then lower amounts of materials would be
required.

[Surface plasmon resonance](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/surfaceplasmonresonancespr/) (SPR) is used to measure association and
dissociation kinetics of ligands (analytes) with a receptor. In SPR, the
association of the analyte and receptor, with one or the other immobilized on
a sensor chip, which incorporates a critical metal sensing surface, induces a
change in total surface plasmon waves resulting in a change in the refractive
index of the layer in contact with a gold film ([Figure
29.5](/books/NBK453057/figure/ch29.f5/?report=objectonly)). This change is
recorded as the SPR signal or resonance units (RUs). Binding is measured in
real time, and information about the association and dissociation kinetics can
thus be obtained, which in turn can be used to obtain Ka and Kd from Equations
2 and 3. There are several instruments available from various companies based
on the principle of SPR.

A variety of chemistries are available for coupling ligand or receptor to the
surface of the chip, including reaction with amines, thiols, or aldehydes, and
noncovalent biotin capture. In some approaches, a glycoprotein ligand for a
GBP is immobilized and binding of the GBP is measured directly. It is also
possible to degrade the immobilized glycoprotein ligand on the chip
sequentially by passing over solutions containing exoglycosidases and
reexamining at each step the binding to different GBPs, thereby obtaining
structural information about the ligand. The immobilized ligand is usually
quite stable and can be used repeatedly for hundreds of runs during a period
of months.

The advantages of this approach are that (1) affinities in the range from
millimolar to picomolar can be measured; (2) complete measurements of _k_ on
and _k_ off are routine (see Equations 2 and 3) making calculations of Kd
straightforward; (3) for immobilization of a molecule using amine coupling,
only 1–5 µg is normally sufficient; (4) typically, the concentration range of
the analyte is 0.1–100×Kd and the typical volumes needed are in the range of
50–150 µL; and (5) measurements are extremely rapid and complete experimental
results can be obtained within a few days. The drawbacks of this approach are
that (1) analytes must have sufficient mass to cause a significant change in
[SPR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/surfaceplasmonresonancespr/) upon binding
(thus, the glycan is usually immobilized instead of the protein); (2) coupling
of free glycans to the chip surface may be inefficient and thus
neoglycoproteins or some other type of large conjugate may be needed; and (3)
there may be inhomogeneity in conditions on the SPR instrument because of mass
transport effects, which could affect the dissociation rate and thus provide
an inaccurate Kd measurement.

Fluorescence polarization is an old technique but only relatively recently has
it been applied to measure the binding constants of glycans to GBPs. This
approach is based on the reduced rotational motion of a relatively small
glycan when it is bound to a relatively large protein compared with the
rotation of the free glycan in solution. Light absorbed by the fluorophore is
emitted as fluorescence, but the angle of the emission relative to the
incident light is depolarized by rotation of the molecule in solution, as
measured through a filter to select molecules oriented close to the plane of
incident polarized light. In practice, a fluorescently labeled glycan is
incubated with increasing concentrations of a GBP and the fluorescence
depolarization is measured. In the absence of the GBP, the fluorescently
labeled glycan tumbles randomly and the degree of polarization is low.
However, if the fluorescently labeled glycan binds to the GBP, its rate of
rotation is diminished and the polarization remains high. By this approach,
one can measure directly the Kd of the interaction as a function of the GBP
concentration. The advantages of this technique are that (1) it is a
homogeneous assay and provides direct measurements of the Kd in solution
without derivatization of the GBP; (2) it is relatively simple and can provide
rapid measurements of many compounds using microtiter plate–based approaches;
(3) it uses relatively small amounts of glycan; (4) the concentrations of all
the molecules are known; (5) it avoids complications of multivalent
interactions because the glycans are monovalent and free in solution; and (6)
it is amenable to inhibition by competitive agents and can be used to
determine relative potency of compounds as inhibitors of GBPs. In the latter
approach, a single fluorescently labeled glycan is mixed with the GBP,
increasing concentrations of inhibitor glycans (which are not fluorescently
labeled) are added, and the inhibition of binding is measured. Because the
interactions are simple single-site competition, it is possible to use the
concentration that causes 50% inhibition (IC50) to derive the approximate Kd
for the inhibitor. Some of the disadvantages are that (1) the technique is
limited to small glycans (≤2000 Da); (2) it requires fluorescence
derivatization of the glycan (the fluorophore may alter the properties of the
glycan); and (3) preparation of the glycan and chemical derivatization may be
tedious and require large amounts of glycans. However, once the fluorescently
labeled glycans are generated, there is usually enough for many assays.

More complex approaches to measure noncovalent complexes between proteins and
glycan ligands include mass spectrometry ([MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/)) and [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/). Soft ionization methods are used to detect
protein–glycan complexes in electrospray ionization MS and in matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight ([MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)-[TOF](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/timeofflighttof/)) MS. Although such methods have several advantages,
including sensitivity and the ability to measure binding to multiple ligands
in a single experiment, they may also be complicated to interpret, because the
noncovalent complex may dissociate during the measurement, the detection may
not be quantitative, and the ionization efficiency of the complex versus the
free protein or ligand may differ. Another MS approach is hydrogen deuterium
exchange (HDX) mass spectrometry, in which the bound ligand alters the
deuterium uptake kinetics on the protein at the binding site of the ligand.
Thus, the increased association of ligand decreases deuterium uptake, which
can be measured on appropriate peptides proteolytically prepared from the
protein after the exchange, and this can be plotted to obtain a binding
isotherm. This method has the advantages of sensitivity and ease of use, but
it also has drawbacks, including the expense of the approach and instrument
time, the problem that relatively small glycans may have limited impact on
deuterium exchange, and conformational changes that affect exchange rates in
regions outside the [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/).

Several types of [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) spectroscopy measurements are useful for
measuring protein–glycan interactions. Interactions can be measured in real
time in solution and there is no need to separate the protein–glycan complex
from the unassociated GBP or glycan. Both line broadening, when weakly bound
ligands are in fast exchange with free ligand, and saturation transfer
difference ([STD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/saturationtransferdifferencestd/)) measurements can be used. However, the
protein–glycan complex has to have clear and detectable chemical shifts
distinct from the unbound materials (usually 1H-NMR is used to detect glycan
only), and often the techniques work best for relatively low affinity
interactions.

Another spectroscopic approach to measuring glycan binding to a protein relies
on changes in intrinsic fluorescence on interacting with a glycan. Finally,
atomic force microscopy (AFM) can also be used to define protein–glycan or
glycan–glycan interactions. In this approach, the force required to separate a
glycan-coated bead from an immobilized GBP can be measured in highly
quantitative methods. Remarkably, single-molecule force measurements can be
made by AFM. This method not only gives information about the strength of
binding, but also provides insight into the molecular nature of noncovalent
bond formation between the protein and its ligand.

The conventional ELISA has been adapted for studying glycans and GBPs in a
variety of formats. Of course, many glycans are antigens and antibodies to
them can be analyzed in the conventional ELISA format. Some of the earliest
approaches used biotinylated bacterial polysaccharides captured on
streptavidin-coated microtiter plates to measure interactions of antibodies to
the polysaccharides. In most types of ELISAs used in glycobiology, either an
antibody or a GBP of interest is immobilized and the binding of a glycan to
the protein is measured, or the reagents are reversed. In either approach, the
glycans are conjugated in some way, such as to biotin or to another protein
with an attached reporter group (e.g., a fluorescent moiety or an enzyme such
as peroxidase).

Competition ELISA-type assays have also recently been developed to probe the
binding site of a GBP. In this approach, a glycan is coupled to a carrier
protein (the target), and its binding to an immobilized GBP is detected
directly. Competitive glycans are added to the wells and their competition for
the GBP is measured as a function of concentration to obtain an IC50. Under
appropriate conditions and concentrations of the ligand, the Ki values and Kd
values are similar. The major advantages of this approach are that (1) it is
relatively easy; (2) it has high-throughput capability and can be used in an
automated fashion by robotic handling; (3) it can provide relative Kd values
if the GBP concentration is varied appropriately over a large range and
binding is saturable; and (4) it has the capacity to define the relative
binding activity of a panel of glycoconjugates. The major disadvantages are
that (1) it does not provide direct information about affinity constants or
other thermodynamic parameters; (2) it can require relatively high amounts of
GBP and glycans if used as a general screening array; and (3) it usually
requires chemical derivatization of glycans or GBPs.

[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) microarrays are an extension of
both ELISA-type formats and modern DNA and protein microarray technology. In
the microarray, glycans are captured, usually covalently, through reaction
with _N_ -hydroxysuccinimide (NHS)-esters or epoxide-containing surfaces on a
glass slide. Glycans are prepared to contain reactive primary amines at their
reducing termini, but other chemical coupling methods are available. In
addition, noncovalent immobilization can be used in which lipid-derivatized
glycans or glycolipids are deposited onto nitrocellulose-coated slides. The
glycans are printed, much like DNA is printed for DNA microarrays, using
contact printers or piezoelectric (noncontact) printing ([Figure
29.6](/books/NBK453057/figure/ch29.f6/?report=objectonly)). Usually, a few
nanoliters of solutions containing glycans in concentrations of 1–100 µm are
deposited by a robotic printer on the glass surface in ∼100-µm-diameter spots.
Slides are incubated for several hours to allow the chemical reactions to
covalently fix the samples on the slides. The slides are then blocked to
prevent nonspecific binding of reagents, and these microarrays overlaid with a
buffer containing the GBP and incubated for several hours to allow equilibrium
binding to occur. The slides are washed to remove unbound GBP and then
analyzed. Analyses involve fluorescence detection, which means that either the
GBP has to be directly fluorescently labeled or a fluorescently tagged
antibody to the GBP must be used.

The chief feature of the successful microarrays are the variety of glycans
they contain and the clustered and high-density presentation of glycans that
promotes binding of even relatively low affinity multivalent GBPs. Thus, the
density of the ligand should be taken into account when interpreting the
results. The type of linker used and the state of the monosaccharide attached
to the linked (ring open or closed) can also affect binding. Publicly
available glycan microarray binding data repositories are increasingly used in
the field. In a typical successful analysis a GBP may bind to several glycans
that share structural features, and binding is visualized or imaged as
intensely fluorescent spots against a dark background. The data are visually
imaged on a scanner and then graphically represented. If desired, the GBP can
then be tested for its binding to the identified candidates by other methods
such as titration microcalorimetry or fluorescence polarization, to define the
Kd as discussed above. The use of microarrays in characterizing GBPs is a
central component of functional glycomics ([Chapter
51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)).

[Multivalent](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/multivalent/) GBPs interacting with
multivalent ligands, as expressed on cells, can cause the cells to
agglutinate. This can be exploited by allowing one to measure the ability of a
soluble glycan to block the agglutination activity of the GBP. The
concentration of the soluble glycan that provides 50% inhibition of
agglutination is taken as the inhibitory concentration (IC50). Such approaches
have been used for many years in studies on lectin-induced agglutination of
cells and were useful in elucidating the nature of the human blood group
substances. If a sufficiently large panel of soluble glycans is used, then the
relative efficacies of each of these can be measured to help define the
specificity of the GBP. A major advantage of this technique is that it does
not require tagging of the glycans. Furthermore, polystyrene or dextran beads
modified with discrete glycans can be used in lieu of cells. In this case, the
glycans on the agglutinating particle are better defined. Usually, the IC50
does not relate directly to the binding affinity, because inhibition is being
measured. The actual binding affinity must be defined by other techniques
described earlier in this chapter.

The interaction of a multivalent GBP or antibody with a multivalent ligand
allows formation of cross-linked complexes in solution. In many cases, these
complexes become insoluble and precipitate. Precipitation may be highly
specific and reflects the affinity constant of the ligand for the receptor. To
quantify this interaction a fixed amount of GBP or antibody is titrated
against a glycoprotein or a glycan to which it binds and a precipitate will
form at a precise ratio of ligand to receptor. The amount of protein or ligand
in the precipitate can be measured directly by chemical means, using assays
for glycans or proteins. The technique of precipitation is useful for studying
potentially multivalent ligands, and it has been used recently to show that
each branch of terminally galactosylated complex-type di-, tri-, and tetra-
antennary N-glycans is independently recognized by galactose-binding lectins.
Another precipitation approach takes advantage of the fact that a complex
between a GBP and a glycan can be “salted out” or precipitated by ammonium
sulfate. A variation of this approach was used in early studies on the
characterization of the hepatocyte asialoglycoprotein receptor, in which the
ligand 125I-labeled asialoorosomucoid was incubated with a preparation of
receptor. The sample was treated with sufficient ammonium sulfate to
precipitate the complex but not the unbound ligand. The precipitated complex
was captured on a filter and the amount of ligand in the complex was
determined by γ-counting.

In this approach, a glycoprotein (or ligand) is mixed with a GBP or antibody
and the mixture is electrophoretically separated in polyacrylamide. For
glycosaminoglycans, this technique is termed affinity co-electrophoresis
(ACE). This method is particularly useful in defining the apparent Kd of the
interaction and allows identification of subpopulations of glycosaminoglycans
that differentially interact with the GBP. In another method, termed crossed
affinity immunoelectrophoresis, a second step of electrophoresis is conducted
in the second perpendicular dimension across an agarose gel that contains
precipitating monospecific antibody to the glycoprotein or ligand. The gel is
then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue and an immunoelectrophoretogram is
obtained. Glycoproteins not interacting with the GBP or antibody have faster
mobility than the complex. The amount of glycoprotein or ligand is determined
by the area under the curves obtained in the second dimensional analysis. This
method is useful for studying glycoforms of proteins and has been particularly
valuable in analyzing glycoforms of α1-acid glycoprotein (an acute-phase
glycoprotein) in serum and changes in its α1-3 fucosylation.

An indirect approach to studying protein–glycan interactions is to express a
copy DNA (cDNA) encoding a glycosyltransferase in an animal or bacterial cell.
The adhesion of the modified cell to a GBP or antibody is then measured and
taken to reflect the binding of the GBP or antibody to the new glycans
(neoglycans) on the cell surface. Alternatively a cDNA encoding a GBP is
expressed in cells and their ability to bind glycan ligands is tested. The
expression of selectins, [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/), and
other GBPs on the cell surface of transfected cells has been helpful in
evaluating the roles of GBPs in cell adhesion under physiological flow
conditions.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.030

The biological effects that glycans elicit are frequently dependent on
recognition of specific glycan features by the proteins with which they
interact. In this chapter, some of the key structural features underlying
glycan–protein interactions, as well as the primary experimental methods that
have led to an understanding of these features, are discussed, specifically
[X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/xraycrystallography/),
nuclear magnetic resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)), and computational modeling.

As emphasized in previous chapters, the numbers of distinct glycans produced
by various organisms is enormous, but at the same time, glycans lack the
diversity in functional groups displayed by other molecules. To achieve
specificity in glycan recognition, proteins rely as much on the actual
stereospecific placement of glycan hydroxyl groups at chiral centers, use of
different linkage sites, and extensive branching as they rely on specific
modifications of hydroxyl groups by processes such as sulfation,
phosphorylation, and esterification. This puts placement of various residues
and functional groups in three dimensions at a premium. Building a three-
dimensional picture of how recognition of glycans by proteins occurs is
therefore essential if we are to understand how glycans are synthesized and
recognized in the many physiological and pathological processes they control.
It is also essential if we are to use knowledge of glycan recognition as a
basis for the production of therapeutic agents that can control these
processes in the event of disease. Building a structure depicting glycan
recognition is not without its challenges. Most glycans are highly dynamic in
solution, sampling many conformations. Often, a single or a small subset of
conformations is selected when a complex forms. This works against the
formation of stable complexes for structural study and the direct use of
solution conformational data in defining conformations of bound glycans.

The search for a structural basis of glycan recognition by proteins is not
new. The concept of glycans fitting into pockets on protein surfaces dates
back to Emil Fischer, who used the phrase “lock and key” to refer to enzymes
that recognize specific glycan substrates. [Lysozyme](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/lysozyme/) was the first “carbohydrate-binding protein” to be
crystallized and have its three-dimensional structure determined. Subsequent
work in the late 1960s and early 1970s led to a structure complexed with a
tetrasaccharide that confirmed the existence of specific interactions
occurring between sugars and proteins, and the ability of proteins to select
the appropriate “key” from numerous possibilities.

Today, protein crystallography has reached a very high degree of
sophistication and is responsible for the vast majority of the more than
100,000 structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank
([PDB](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/proteindatabankpdb/)); however, producing
a structure with ligands in place is still challenging. The structures that
exist tend to have relatively small ligands and ligands with particularly high
binding constants. [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) recognition
frequently involves contacts with multiple residues to achieve specificity.
So, native glycan ligands are often larger than other types of ligands. Often,
high avidity is achieved through multivalent interactions, in which case the
affinity for an isolated ligand–protein interaction is small. Nevertheless,
there are a significant number of crystal structures for glycan–protein
complexes, and these have contributed greatly to our understanding of the
types of interactions that make glycan recognition possible.

Structural information on bound glycan ligands that is complementary to that
from [X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/xraycrystallography/) is increasingly coming from
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) methods. This
is particularly valuable in that it is applicable to ligands with a broader
range of affinities, including many that have the lower affinities amplified
in multivalent interactions. It is also applicable in solution under near
physiological conditions in which concerns about the effects of crystal
lattice contacts and occlusion of some interaction sites are absent. It is
even possible to conduct some experiments on assemblies that mimic a membrane
surface environment, an environment where many protein–glycan interactions
occur.

Although we will not discuss specific contributions in this chapter, it is
important to note that structural methodology is continually evolving, with
additional information coming from techniques like small-angle X-ray
scattering ([SAXS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/smallanglexrayscatteringsaxs/)) and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM).
Recent advances in cryo-EM have been particularly noteworthy with resolution
beginning to push that of [X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/xraycrystallography/) without the need for crystallization or large
amounts of material.

The fundamental understanding of glycan–protein interactions, as enriched by
experimental studies of all types, has now been encoded in powerful molecular
simulation programs that provide a computational approach to generating three
dimensional pictures of glycan–protein interactions. These are important
because it is difficult to produce complex glycan ligands in the amounts and
purity required for most experimental approaches. These methods, although
still evolving toward reasonable confidence in outcomes, provide models for
experimentally inaccessible systems that can be tested with a variety of
nonstructural approaches. They can also be leveraged with sparse structural
data that alone could not provide detailed structural information.

[X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/xraycrystallography/) is
a very powerful method for obtaining details of protein–ligand interactions.
It excels in terms of the size range of molecules that can be studied (from
small compounds to large multiprotein complexes) and in efficiency of data
collection when high-energy light beams at synchrotron sources are used. One
of the limitations is still the crystallization step. Crystals of
protein–carbohydrate complexes can be obtained by cocrystallizing the two
partners or by soaking the carbohydrate ligand into an existing protein
crystal. Because the quality of the crystal defines the limit of the
diffraction pattern, and therefore the resolution of the structure, flexible
oligosaccharide ligands may create structural heterogeneity and therefore
limit the quality of the crystal. High-quality crystals of lectins are
generally obtained with glycans ranging from mono- to trisaccharides;
glycosaminoglycan (GAG)-binding proteins or antibodies, which can bind much
larger ligands, are more rarely crystallized in complex with carbohydrate
ligands.

Diffraction data are now typically collected at very low temperature, to
protect molecules from radiation damage on high-energy synchrotron beam lines.
Because freezing may damage the crystals owing to ice formation, glycerol is
often used as cryoprotectant. Glycerol, with its carbohydrate-like
hydroxylated carbons, is therefore frequently observed in glycan-binding
sites, providing information about the amino acids involved in binding but
sometimes competing with the carbohydrate ligand. When data with sufficient
resolution can be collected, other obstacles, such as the lack of phase
information in scattered X-ray intensities are encountered. This problem is
particularly challenging when studying proteins with a novel fold, as
molecular replacement cannot be used to assign phases.
[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/) chemistry can bring
a solution to the problem, because selenium derivatives of monosaccharides can
be incorporated in ligands and anomalous scattering from elements like
selenium can provide phasing information.

Crystal structures of protein–carbohydrate complexes can be retrieved from
different sources, including the [PDB](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/proteindatabankpdb/), but also from more specialized databases. The
[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes
([CAZY](http://www.cazy.org/)) database provides links to the PDB page for all
crystal structures of glycosylhydrolases, glycosyltransferases, and their
associated carbohydrate-binding modules. The Glyco 3D portal is a suite of
searchable databases covering the three-dimensional features of bioactive
carbohydrates but also of glycosyltransferases, lectins, monoclonal antibodies
against carbohydrates, and GAG-binding proteins. As an example from this
portal, the [Lectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/lectin/)-3D database
includes more than 1500 lectin three-dimensional structures (285 different
proteins), 64% of these structures being determined in complex with a
carbohydrate ligand. For each structure, links for coordinates, references,
and taxonomy are provided, as well as glycan array data when available at the
Consortium for Functional [Glycomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycomics/). Mining for structural data is therefore possible, and
structures can be analyzed at different levels revealing not only atomic
details of the binding sites but also protein folds and oligomeric states.
Examples are given below that illustrate how convergent evolution has built
robust systems for efficient recognition of glycans by lectins.

The interactions between carbohydrates and amino acids include hydrogen bonds,
van der Waals contacts, ionic bonds, and a number of more specialized
interactions. CH-π interactions, for example, are associated with the frequent
occurrence of aromatic amino acids in carbohydrate-binding sites. Water
molecules are often observed that bridge between carbohydrate hydroxyl groups
and amino acids. Interestingly, a significant number of enzyme or lectins use
divalent ions that directly coordinate to the hydroxyl groups of carbohydrates
and to side chains of amino acids. Among the 260 different lectins
crystallized to date, more than 20 involve calcium ions in their binding
sites. Most of them belong to the C-type lectin families (including selectins
and DC-SIGN [dendritic cell–specific intercellular adhesion
molecule-3-grabbing integrin]), but other types of lectins, including human
intelectin, fungal adhesin, sea cucumber β-trefoil lectin, and bacterial LecA
from _Pseudomonas aeruginosa,_ also are found to have a calcium ion in their
binding site ([Figure
30.1](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f1/?report=objectonly)). LecB, the other
lectin from _P. aeruginosa_ , requires the presence of two closely located
calcium ions. Calcium ions contribute to the specificity of lectins by
selecting for precise stereochemistries of hydroxyl groups; the two calcium
ions of LecB, for example, only coordinate monosaccharides with two equatorial
and one axial hydroxyl group as present in “fuco” and “manno” configurations.
The ions also play a role in enhanced affinity through delocalization of
charge as evaluated by quantum chemical calculations, and through compensation
for binding entropy losses by releasing strongly coordinated water molecules.

[Lectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/lectin/) structures adopt a limited
number of folds ([Figure
30.2](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f2/?report=objectonly)). Among them, there
is a strong predominance of β-sheet-containing domains, such as β-sandwich,
β-prism, β-trefoil, or β-propeller. The β-sandwich fold, which is an assembly
of two β-sheets, characterizes a large family with different structures that
vary in size and localization of binding sites. For example, fimbrial adhesins
are very different from galectins in that they use a site near the edge of a
sheet as opposed to the concave surface of a sheet. Some structural
convergence is nevertheless observed. Intracellular animal lectins, which are
involved in the quality control of glycoprotein synthesis, share the same
protein fold with legume lectins.

Convergence is also observed for the β-propeller fold which is a circular
arrangement of small β-sandwiches, called blades. Structures with five, six,
or seven blades have been observed for lectins. With the exception of
bacterial and fungal fucose-binding six-blade β-propellers which are
evolutionary related, these structures do not present sequence similarities.
However, they share the same global shape allowing for the presentation of all
binding sites on the same side of the “donut,” providing for very efficient
multivalent binding to glycoconjugates on cell surfaces. This multivalent
effect results in high avidity: PVL from the fungus _Psathyrella velutina_ has
an affinity of only 100 µm for GlcNAc at each binding site but an apparent
avidity of 10 nm for GlcNAc presented on chips. This high avidity makes PVL an
excellent tool for identifying tumor cells presenting truncated glycans with
exposed GlcNAc.

[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) can provide
de novo high-resolution structures of proteins and glycan–protein complexes.
It can also provide dynamic information when parts of bound glycans retain
some of the mobility displayed in solution. However, NMR-based structure
determination usually requires uniform isotopic labeling with magnetic nuclei
such as 13C and 15N, to complement data from the highly abundant nucleus, 1H.
Isotopic labeling can be accomplished when proteins can be expressed in
bacterial hosts, but even then application is largely restricted to proteins
of <20 kDa, or of <40 kDa when perdeuteration can be used to improve
resolution. The need for uniform isotopic labeling excludes application to
many additional proteins of interest. In particular, production of
glycoproteins is typically attempted only when expression in eukaryotic hosts
is possible, or glycosylation machinery is introduced into a bacterial
expression host. Hence, only a few complete structures of glycoproteins with
native glycosylation have been produced by NMR methods. However, NMR has fewer
restrictions when it builds on protein structures available from [X-ray
crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/xraycrystallography/) or
computational modeling, and capitalizes on its ability to focus on data
involving actual glycan–protein interaction sites. We illustrate this
potential in the following sections.

The initial step on the route to produce a three-dimensional structure of a
protein by [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)
methods is usually the assignment of backbone resonances, including the proton
and nitrogen resonances of all amide 1H-15N pairs. This step is quite robust
and can be accomplished in much less time, and on much larger targets, than a
complete structure determination. These assignments are based on a series of
multi-dimensional experiments that correlate chemical shifts of directly
bonded nuclear pairs. Among these is the two-dimensional 1H-15N heteronuclear
single quantum coherence ([HSQC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/heteronuclearsinglequantumcoherencehsqc/)) experiment, which correlates
an amide 1H-15N pair through the appearance of a cross peak at the chemical
shifts of the amide proton and nitrogen of a particular protein residue. Once
cross peaks in this experiment are assigned, changes in chemical shift on
addition of a glycan ligand can be used to identify a binding site. These
changes often arise from small perturbations in residue geometry rather than a
direct effect of the ligand on chemical shift, but the effects are usually
sufficiently localized to identify the binding site. [Figure
30.3](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f3/?report=objectonly) shows an example of
changes occurring on the interaction of a hexamer of chondroitin sulfate (CS),
sulfated at the O4 position of each GalNAc residue ([Chapters
3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/) and [17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). There are actually
two types of perturbations observed; gradual changes in chemical shift as
ligand is added (arrows in [Figure
30.3A](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f3/?report=objectonly)) and the
disappearance of one peak while another appears (ellipses in [Figure
30.3A](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f3/?report=objectonly)). These correspond
to fast exchange on and off a weak binding site and slow exchange on and off a
strong binding site, respectively. Perturbed residues can be mapped onto an
existing structure of the protein as shown in [Figure
30.3B](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f3/?report=objectonly) for the strong
binding site. As with many complexes involving a sulfated GAG, positively
charged residues are involved; in this case histidine residues and a lysine
residue are among those showing chemical shift changes. The advantage of these
experiments is that a range of ligands can be examined, regardless of whether
cocrystallization with a protein can be accomplished. A limitation is that the
backbone resonances of the protein need to be assigned first.

[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) also offers
the potential for characterization of the parts of a ligand that make contact
with a protein and the geometry the ligand adopts on binding to a protein's
surface. In both cases, the characterization stems from transfer of
magnetization from one NMR active spin to another NMR active spin (usually
protons) in a distance dependent manner. In the case of bound ligand geometry,
the experiment relies on a transferred nuclear Overhauser effect (trNOE). The
basis is the same as for the [NOE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearoverhausereffectnoe/) that is used in protein structure
determination by NMR; however, only the ligand spectrum is observed.
Measurements are usually made from cross peaks in two-dimensional experiments
similar to the [HSQC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/heteronuclearsinglequantumcoherencehsqc/) experiment mentioned above,
except that both dimensions are proton chemical shift, and cross peaks have
intensities dependent on the inverse sixth power of the distance between
proton pairs (1/ _r_ 6) rather than direct bonding. An average over both bound
and free ligands is observed, but contributions are heavily weighted by those
coming from the ligand in a complex because of scaling in proportion to
molecular weight. This makes it possible to conduct trNOE experiments with a
large excess of ligand (>10:1) and very little protein. Also, there is no
requirement for isotopic labeling of either ligand or protein, and having a
high-molecular-weight complex is an advantage. The geometry of the bound
ligand is derived primarily from distances measured between protons that fall
on opposite sides of a glycosidic bond. This distance then restrains
glycosidic torsion angles accessible to structural models. Although there are
many cases in which the bound geometry is similar to that of the dominant
conformer found in solution, there are cases in which the geometry differs.
Here, trNOE experiments offer unique insight that can guide synthesis of
competitive inhibitors.

Transfer of magnetization from protons on a protein to protons on a ligand in
an [NOE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearoverhausereffectnoe/)-like
fashion can also provide information on the parts of a ligand in contact with
amino acids in a protein's binding pocket (the ligand's binding epitope). In
some cases, NOEs between a ligand proton and a specific amino acid proton can
be observed, but this requires work with near-equimolar concentrations of
ligand and protein, as well as full resonance assignment for both the ligand
and the protein. A far more widely applied experiment sacrifices knowledge
about specific protons on the protein for an ability to work with very large
unlabeled and unassigned proteins, again at ratios of ligand to protein
approaching 100:1. This experiment is called a saturation transfer difference
([STD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/saturationtransferdifferencestd/))
experiment. It relies on the fact the magnetization transfer between protons
in large proteins is so efficient that it makes little difference where a
change in magnetization is initiated; it can be from saturation of a methyl
proton having a resonance a one extreme of the spectrum (upfield), or an
aromatic proton having a resonance at the other extreme (downfield). The
saturation effect eventually diffuses to a ligand proton close to the protein
surface and the resonance of this proton is reduced in intensity. Data are
collected as a difference between one-dimensional proton spectra with and
without saturation in the extremes of the protein spectrum. The resulting
difference spectrum is dominated by resonances from the ligand that have
contact with the protein.

[Figure 30.4](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f4/?report=objectonly) shows an
example that probes the interaction between a complex N-glycan ([Chapters
3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/) and [9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) and an HIV broadly
neutralizing antibody. These antibodies, specifically interact with surface
glycans of HIV and are effective in inhibiting binding of the virus to target
cells. Hence, there has been significant interest in exactly which glycans are
recognized. Antibodies are large glycosylated proteins that are not usually
amenable to [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)
investigation by isotope-dependent methods, but [STD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/saturationtransferdifferencestd/) methods are applicable. The example
uses a sample 20 µm in protein (Fab fragment) and 2 mm in glycan. Normal and
STD spectra are superimposed to show the enhancement of resonances which
include some that come specifically from the Neu5Ac residues (Sia) on the
termini of the glycan branches. STD investigations have been conducted on some
other very large and complex systems including receptors embedded in membrane
fragments, whole cells, and viruses.

The above provides a glimpse of [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) experiments that can be used to investigate
protein–glycan interactions. There are many others that take advantage of
additional properties such as differences in translational diffusion constants
and specific interactions with water molecules. Many of these have been
adopted as screening methods used in fragment based drug discovery programs.
Information about these is available in Further Reading.

Experimental structural information obtained by crystallographic and
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) methods have
clearly been of value in building an understanding of the molecular
interactions that lead to glycan recognition by proteins. However, systems in
which interactions are of interest far outnumber the cases in which these
methods can be applied. Most crystal structures contain either small ligands
or yield useful electron densities for only parts of larger ligands. NMR
methods although giving detailed information on bound ligand geometries,
frequently give only qualitative information on parts of ligands or protein
that are in intimate contact with each other. Both methods require substantial
effort, particularly in preparing samples for investigation. A particular
problem for glycans of interest is that they are often complex molecules that
are difficult to prepare in highly pure forms, or in the quantities needed for
experimental investigation. There are also functionally important dynamic
processes (e.g., enzymatic conversions of glycan substrates to product and
transport of glycans) that are not well represented by static,
thermodynamically stable structures. Computational methods can extend analysis
into these less accessible regions of structural investigation.

Computational contributions to our understanding of glycan properties have a
long history, beginning with a very fundamental understanding of factors
influencing anomeric configuration and glycosidic torsion angles. These glycan
specific factors, such as the anomeric effect and the exo-anomeric effect, are
described more thoroughly in [Chapters 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/),
[3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/), and [50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/). When
protein–glycan interactions are of interest, the situation becomes more
complex with hydrogen bonding, van der Waals interactions, and electrostatic
interactions between glycan and various amino acids becoming important. For
very limited sets of atoms, it is possible to pursue an understanding of
interactions using advanced quantum mechanical (QM) methods, but for larger
systems other approaches based on semiempirical “force fields” are used, such
as molecular mechanics (MM) and molecular dynamics
([MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/)).

Empirical “force fields” used in MM and [MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/moleculardynamicsmd/) modules of packages such as Amber, CHARMM, and
GROMOS are typically represented in terms of bond, bond angle, torsion angle,
van der Waals, and electrostatic contributions to a molecular energy.
Parameters in functions representing each of these terms have been optimized
to reproduce QM as well as a selection of thermodynamic and spectroscopic
data. Initially, these force fields were developed for proteins alone, so did
not include contributions such as the anomeric and exo-anomeric effects found
in glycans. Subsequently, force fields explicitly designed to represent the
energetics of glycans have been developed for use with these packages (e.g.,
the GLYCAM force field that is widely used with Amber). There still are
challenges in simulating molecular interactions with these packages, among
them perfecting models for solvent and accurately representing electrostatic
interactions. These issues are very important for glycans, which are rich in
hydroxyl groups that act as both hydrogen bond donors and acceptors in their
interactions with water. Some glycans (e.g., GAGs) are highly charged, having
both carboxylate groups and sulfate groups that interact strongly with
positively charged amino acids in proteins and with water. Early simulations
were performed with implicit solvent models based on dielectric behavior.
Given the recent improvements in computational capabilities, trends are toward
the use of explicit solvent models, such as TIP3P and TIP5P.

MM uses terms in the force fields to derive potential energy contributions
that can be summed to generate a potential energy for any fixed conformation.
In principle, these conformations can be sampled using various search
algorithms to generate an ensemble of possible conformations from which
thermodynamic parameters can be extracted. More frequently,
[MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/), which uses the forces
directly in Newton's second law of motion, is used to simulate movement of all
atoms and to generate an ensemble of conformations and orientations that can
be reached over times accessible to simulation (nsec to msec depending on the
size of the system and efficiency of the computational platform). One
advantage of MD is that certain important motional properties, such as the
time for diffusion through a channel or the time needed for a conformational
transition, can be modeled. One must remember, however, that force fields are
meant to represent molecules near energy minima of a conformational surface
and are not likely to accurately represent the height of larger barriers
separating different conformational states and certainly cannot represent
changes in bonding that occur in a chemical reaction.

The actual characterization of how a ligand (a glycan in our case) interacts
with a protein involves not just the conformational energetics of the free
glycan, but also the conformational energetics of amino acid residues involved
in the binding site and the energetics of the glycan–protein interaction. In
some cases, there may be relatively little information on where the binding
site on a protein is, so the characterization involves locating the best
binding site, finding the best conformation for the ligand in the bound state,
and finding the best conformations for the parts of the protein involved in
binding. The whole process is referred to as “docking” a ligand onto the
protein surface. Most docking programs (e.g., Dock, AutoDock, AutoDock Vina,
and Glide) are designed to make the initial search for a site very efficient.
To do this, they break the process into stages beginning with a rigid-body
docking step that is designed to identify the best docking site and best
initial “poses” for the ligand. Force fields are often simplified or
interaction energies precalculated on a gird to speed the process. Rigid-body
docking generally works well for many small drug-like molecules. Also, in many
situations, there is a crystal structure of the protein with a native ligand
in the binding site, mitigating the problem of optimizing side chain
conformations. For glycans, the situation is more complicated; the ligands are
often flexible and protein structures with a native glycan in a binding site
are often lacking.

In molecular docking, the objective is not to generate a single-bound
structure in the first stage but hundreds of “poses” that can be scored and
ranked so that a subset can be selected for subsequent stages. Scoring
functions are variable, but usually include some sort of interaction energy as
part of the score. Subsequent phases typically allow increased flexibility of
side-chains and finally an [MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/moleculardynamicsmd/) refinement of poses, often in explicit water. Final
scoring or ranking of poses by energy, even when performed with force fields
used in MD programs, seldom leads to a single clear solution, and it has
become common to filter poses with additional experimental information such as
binding epitopes from [STD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/saturationtransferdifferencestd/) [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) experiments, or interactions with residues
that have been identified as important in mutational studies.

Some docking programs are emerging (e.g., HADDOCK) that make use of
experimental data in earlier stages to guide the selection of initial poses as
well as maintain known preferences for glycan conformations or specific
ligand–protein contacts. Some of the contributions to understanding of
glycan–protein interactions that have come from docking exercises, as well as
more advanced applications that merge QM with MM or
[MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/) are described in more
detail in the following sections.

Heparan sulfate (HS) chains, synthesized initially as a repeating disaccharide
of glucuronic acid (GlcA) and _N_ -acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), and modified by
sulfation and epimerization of some GlcA residues to iduronic acid (IdoA), are
known to interact with a number of growth factors, receptors, and chemokines
([Chapters 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/) and [38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)).
Despite the interest in the roles of these interactions in cell migration and
differentiation, there are relatively few experimental structures depicting
interactions with HS fragments larger than tetra-saccharides. Notable
exceptions are the structures of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) in complex
with heparin oligosaccharides or their mimics ([Chapter
38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). Although crystal structures for the protein
components of many other systems exist, suitable crystals are less apt to form
in the presence of HS oligomers. Also, it is difficult to obtain homogeneous
preparations of oligomers larger than tetramers because of the variable
sulfation patterns and variable conversion of GlcA to IdoA.

The dearth of experimental structural information has led to the use of
computational modeling to predict structures for many of these complexes.
Specific sulfation patterns and IdoA substitution can be performed with ease.
Yet, the applications of modeling methods to these systems are far from
trivial because of the flexibility of the HS chains and the ionic character of
interactions that dominate their energetics. Not only are the glycosidic
angles variable in HS chains, but the IdoA rings also sample several
conformations including a chair, 1C4, and a skew-boat conformer, 2S0.
Moreover, orientations of the sulfate groups are variable as are the side-
chains of the lysine and arginine residues with which they tend to interact.
Nevertheless, applications are made, and a discussion of one of these seems
appropriate.

The chemokine CXCL12α (also called SDF1) is a dimeric protein essential for
the homing of hematopoietic stem cells to fetal bone marrow; it also plays a
role in related developmental processes. Like many other chemokines, it binds
to HS in a way that modulates its chemotactic signaling, and there is much
speculation as to whether it binds to a segment of HS with a particular
sulfation or IdoA/GlcA pattern. [Molecular docking](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/moleculardocking/) methods applied to this system illustrate well the
usage of these studies.

This particular study used AutoDock 4 followed by an
[MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/) refinement of top
scoring poses. These hybrid methods have become common place, combining the
efficiency of docking with the ability to refine local structure for better
energetics. The initial protein structure in this case came from a dimer
cocrystallized with a simple heparin disaccharide (2NWG). The initial geometry
for an HS hexasaccharide (HS6) was taken from an
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) study. HS6
was fully sulfated at the nitrogen and 6-oxygen of GlcN and the 2-oxygen of
IdoA rings that were held in the 2S0 conformation. Atomic charges for the
residues in HS6 were set to match QM electrostatic potentials. The docking
began with a semirigid simulated annealing phase in which the ligand is
translated and rotated in steps toward the protein surface, but with
additional simulated annealing (a short MD run with a programmed temperature
variation) at each step, allowing the sulfate and hydroxyl groups of the
ligand to move. The docked structures were scored with default parameters that
mimic a free energy of binding. The best docked complexes were immersed in a
TIP3P water box and subjected to 20 ns of constant temperature MD. For the MD
steps, the Amber routine NAMD was used with standard Amber 99SB force field
parameters for the protein and GLYCAM06 parameters for the glycan. Final
scoring was performed by extracting coordinates for the complex and
calculating free energies of binding in implicit solvent with a MM/PBSA
procedure.

The resulting structures of HS6 from five selected
[MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/) runs are shown
superimposed on the protein structure from 2NWG in [Figure
30.5](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f5/?report=objectonly). The structures are
not identical but lie along the same wide groove at the center of the dimer.
Amino acid residue contacts found consistently in the simulations are
indicated on the figure. The dominant residues in contact are largely
positively charged residues (K1, K24, H25, K27, R41). The actual contacts with
HS vary with the side chains adopting different conformations and the HS
rolling somewhat in the groove, but there is experimental evidence to support
participation of these residues. Further examination of these models may well
identify substitutions on HS (deleting certain sulfation sites) that may
suggest distinct patterns that would be more tightly bound by CXCL12α.

A large number of enzymes are involved in the synthesis and degradation of
glycans (more than 300 human enzymes). Their relative activities, combined
with cellular location, are essential to the proper balance of these processes
and any alteration, including genetic mutation, can lead to disease in humans.
Pathogens also depend on similar processes and understanding such mechanisms
can facilitate the design of selective inhibitors of pathogen enzymes. This is
another area where molecular docking can play a role. Structural studies of
glycan–protein complexes usually require a stable system, not one that would
continually convert substrates to products. Moreover, selective inhibitors are
often modeled on transition states that are inherently high in energy and low
in population for any system at equilibrium.

A recent example in which modeling has played a role involves the
glycosyltranferase, ST6Gal1. This is the enzyme that adds a sialic acid
(typically Neu5Ac) to the galactose terminated branches of N-glycans by
transferring Neu5Ac from its nucleotide-sugar donor, CMP-Neu5Ac to an acceptor
terminated with a Galβ1-4GlcNAc moiety ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)).
The production of crystal structures of ST6Gal1, from both human and rat,
opens the possibility of modeling at least a pretransition complex with both
donor and acceptor. For the study discussed here, the crystal structure of the
rat enzyme that contained neither donor nor acceptor (4MPS) was used as a
starting point. The CMP-Neu5Ac was modeled into the active site based on the
inactive donor analog in the crystal structure of the CstII protein (1RO7),
which has less than a 20% sequence identity overall, but a much higher
identity in the part of the active site that contains the donor. An initial
structure for the minimal acceptor, Galβ1-4GlcNAc, was generated using the
GLYCAM WebTool, but glycosidic bonds and hydroxyl groups were allowed to
rotate during docking. Docking used the program AutoDock Vina which is similar
to AutoDock in file format and overall strategy, but is much more efficient
because of parallelism and improvements in the optimization routines, and it
has improved scoring functions. As in the previous example, an additional
[MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/) step in explicit TIP3P
water was used to refine the top ranked docked structure containing protein,
donor, and acceptor. Here, MD routines in Amber12 were used with the FF99SB,
GAFF, and GLYCAM06 force field parameters for the protein, CMP-Neu5Ac, and
Galβ1-4GlcNAc, respectively. MD production runs of 100 ns were generated and
interaction energies were analyzed using a MM/GBSAS routine.

Although the positions of donor and amino acid residues near the donor were
modeled to be quite similar to those seen in other transferases, the
docking/[MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/) procedure
provides a unique view of a possible acceptor position and its interactions.
Most of the interaction energy holding the acceptor in place comes from
interactions with the galactose ring which is well positioned to allow
nucleophilic attack on the anomeric carbon of the nucleotide activated Neu5Ac.
This energy results from hydrophobic stacking of Tyr-366 with the nonpolar
face of the pyranose ring and a network of hydrogen bonds between Asp-271,
Asn-230, His-367, and Gln-232 of the protein and O2, O3, O4, and O6 hydroxyl
groups of Gal. The position of the GlcNAc is more variable, but does
contribute to binding energy. The position and interactions among protein,
donor, and acceptor are depicted in [Figure
30.6](/books/NBK453078/figure/ch30.f6/?report=objectonly).

Although the O6 of Gal and the C2 of Neu5Ac, which will eventually form a
bond, are oriented properly and a catalytic H367 is in position to facilitate
removal of the 6-hydroxyl proton, the distance between Gal-O6 and Neu5Ac-C2 is
still long and the Neu5Ac ring shows no significant distortion from a chair
conformation. [MD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/moleculardynamicsmd/) force
fields do not allow this type of distortion. QM/MM methods do allow
calculations that can predict energies along a minimum energy path between a
pretransition geometry (as depicted here) and products. The maximum energy
along this reaction path corresponds to the transition state which would be
represented in this case as a boat structure for the Neu5Ac ring with a
partial positive charge on the C2 carbon, a lengthened C2-O2 bond, and a much
shortened C2-O1-Gal distance. A calculation using these methods would
presumably identify specific protein residues involved in stabilizing this
transition state.

Structural biology is an evolving area of science both in terms of methodology
and questions to be answered. The principle methodologies discussed here are
each evolving: crystallographic methods using new X-ray sources such as X-ray
lasers are allowing use of microcrystals in cases in which larger crystals
fail to grow. Hyperpolarization methods are reducing the sensitivity
limitations of [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/), particularly for applications to amorphous
solids, including fibrils and membrane fragments. Finally, advances in
computational technology are allowing simulation of ever larger systems. At
the same time, structural targets are shifting from detailed characterization
of single proteins and protein–glycan complexes to larger scale assemblies
that cooperate to elicit a functional response. Improvements in methodology
have the potential to provide near atomic resolution for systems in some of
these more complex environments. [SAXS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/smallanglexrayscatteringsaxs/), for example, is increasingly used to
characterize complexes. Cryo-EM single particle methods are approaching X-ray
resolution for complexes such as a β-glycosidase with a bound inhibitor, and
cryo-EM tomography methods may well extend observation to cell surfaces. This
is a promising situation for improved understanding of glycan function in
biological systems.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Steve M.
Fernandes, Jason W. Labonte, Vered Padler-Karavani, and Tong Zhu.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.031

The [R-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/rtypelectins/) are members
of a superfamily of proteins that contain a carbohydrate-recognition domain
([CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)) that
is structurally similar to the one in ricin. Ricin is considered the first
lectin to be discovered, and it is thus the prototypical lectin in this
category. R-type lectins are present in plants, animals, and bacteria, and the
lectin domain in some cases is associated with a separate subunit that is a
potent toxin. The structure–function relationships of this group of proteins
are discussed in this chapter.

In 1888, Peter Hermann Stillmark at the University of Dorpat reported that
seed extracts of the poisonous plant _Ricinus communis_ (castor bean) contain
a factor that could agglutinate erythrocytes. He named this agglutinin
“ricin.” Other agglutinins were soon discovered in the seed extracts of other
species of plants, notably the related protein abrin from _Abrus precatorius_
, and by the middle of the 20th century, these proteins had become important
members of the general class of glycan-binding proteins (GBPs) known as
“lectins.” Interestingly, Paul Erhlich in the early 1890s used ricin and abrin
in early studies of immunogenicity to show in animals the ability to produce
neutralizing antibodies to one specific protein. Modern structural studies on
ricin showed that its [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) is closely related in sequence and
three-dimensional structure to the CRDs of a number of plant lectins, a
protein fold now known to be in many animal and bacterial lectins. All
proteins containing this ricin-type CRD are now classified as [R-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/rtypelectins/) ([Figure
31.1](/books/NBK453065/figure/ch31.f1/?report=objectonly)).

Two different lectins can be purified from _R. communis_ seeds, and based on
the earlier nomenclature they are termed RCA-I and RCA-II. RCA-I is an
agglutinin but a very weak toxin. The other lectin RCA-II is ricin, and it is
both an agglutinin and a very potent toxin. Ricin is one of the most famous
lectins in the world, because it can be derived from the common castor bean
and has been used by villains to kill or threaten people.

RCA-I is ∼120 kDa and ricin is ∼60 kDa ([Figure
31.1](/books/NBK453065/figure/ch31.f1/?report=objectonly)). Ricin is
synthesized as a single prepropolypeptide containing an A-chain domain, a
12-amino-acid linker region, and the B chain, with proteolysis generating the
separate A and B chains. The A chain is an N-glycoside hydrolase that
inactivates the 60S ribosome, and the B chain binds sugar. Mature ricin
contains four intrachain disulfide bonds and a single disulfide bond links the
A chain to the B chain. The mature A chain has 267 amino acids, and the B
chain has 262 amino acids. Each B chain polypeptide is a product of gene
duplications and has two CRDs, each of which is composed of an ancient
40-amino-acid galactose-binding polypeptide region.

In contrast, RCA-I is a tetramer with two ricin heterodimer-like proteins that
are noncovalently associated. Each heterodimer in RCA-I contains an A-chain
disulfide linked to the galactose-binding B chain. The sequences of the A
chain of ricin and the A chain of RCA-I differ in 18 of 267 residues and are
93% identical, whereas the B chains differ in 41 of 262 residues and are 84%
identical. All of the subunits are N-glycosylated and usually express
oligomannose-type N-glycans. Because ricin is a multimeric glycoprotein,
recombinant forms produced in _Escherichia coli_ (such as ricin B chain) are
usually poorly active, and eukaryotic expression systems must be used. The
genome of _R. communis_ also encodes several other proteins that have high
homology with ricin, and some of these lectins have been designated ricin-A,
-B, -C, -D, and -E.

The two CRDs in the B chain of ricin are about 35 Å apart. Thus, ricin binds
divalently to either terminal β-linked galactose or _N_ -acetylgalactosamine,
whereas RCA-I prefers terminal β-linked galactose. Indeed, these lectins are
often purified and separated from one another by differential elution from
galactose-based affinity resins; ricin is eluted first with the hapten GalNAc
and then RCA-I is eluted with Gal. Although the affinities of these lectins
for monosaccharides are very low (Kd in the range 10−3 to 10−4 m), lectin
binding to cells is very high affinity (Kd in the range 10−7 to 10−8 m), which
arises from the multivalency and enhanced binding to multiple surface glycans
terminating in the sequence Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R. In general, both ricin and RCA-I
bind to glycans containing nonreducing terminal Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R or
GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc-R, although they will bind weakly to the isomer
Galβ1-3GlcNAc-R. Neither ricin nor RCA-I binds well to glycoconjugates
containing nonreducing terminal α-linked Gal residues. Immobilized RCA-I is
commonly used for glycan isolation and characterization because it is safer
and has higher avidity owing to its tetrameric nature. In contrast, ricin is
often used as a toxin in cell selection for glycosylation mutants, and the A
chain of ricin is often used in chimeric proteins as a toxin for specific-cell
killing.

The [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) in
the R-type domain of ricin and RCA-I is a carbohydrate-binding molecule (CBM)
and has been placed in the CBM13 family in the
[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes
([CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/)) database (see [Chapter
6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). The R-type domain is an ancient protein fold that
is found in many glycosyltransferases as well as in bacterial and fungal
hydrolases. Interestingly, the R-type CRD is one of the few that is well
conserved between animal, plant, and bacterial lectins.

The crystal structure of ricin ([Figure
31.2](/books/NBK453065/figure/ch31.f2/?report=objectonly)) shows that the A
chain has eight α-helices and eight β-strands and it is the catalytic subunit.
The B chain, which contains R-type lectin domains, has two tandem CRDs that
are ∼35 Å apart and have a shape resembling a barbell, with one binding domain
at each end. Each R-type domain has a three-lobed organization that is a
β-trefoil structure (from the Latin “trifolium” meaning “three-leaved plant,”
as seen in leaves from some pea plants and clovers) ([Figure
31.3](/books/NBK453065/figure/ch31.f3/?report=objectonly)). The β-trefoil
structure probably arose evolutionarily through gene fusion events linking a
42-amino-acid peptide subdomain that has galactose-binding activity. The three
lobes are termed α, β, and γ and are arranged around a threefold axis.
Conceivably, each lobe could be an independent binding site, but in most
[R-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/rtypelectins/) only one or two
of these lobes retain the conserved amino acids required for sugar binding.
[Sugar](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sugar/) binding is relatively shallow in
these loops and arises from aromatic amino acid stacking against the
Gal/GalNAc residues and from hydrogen bonding between amino acids and hydroxyl
groups of the sugar ligands. A characteristic feature of these loops in the
R-type domain in ricin is the presence of (QxW)3 repeats (where x is any amino
acid), which are found in many, but not all, R-type family members. But not
all proteins with a β-trefoil fold bind carbohydrate, as this structural
domain can promote other types of interactions, including binding to protein
and RNA. Examples of other proteins with the β-trefoil fold include members of
the actin cross-linking protein fascin, interleukin 1 cytokine family, and
fibroblasts growth factors (FGFs) 1 and 2.

Ricin is remarkably toxic and the impact of ingested ricin is severe, with
symptoms initiated after a 2- to 24-hour latent period. The lethal dose (LD50)
of ricin may be as low as 3–5 µg/kg per kilogram of body weight, depending on
the mode of exposure. Ricin is a type II ribosome-inactivating protein (RIP-
II). Overall, RCA-I is less toxic than ricin, apparently the result of the
weaker enzymatic activity of its A chain. Notably, type I ribosome-
inactivating proteins (RIP-I) that lack a B subunit are not lectins and are
much less toxic than ricin because of poor ability to enter cells. Examples of
RIP-I proteins are saporin, lychnin, gelonin, and momordin-I.

Ricin binds to cells via interactions with β-linked Gal/GalNAc-containing
glycans on the cell surface and is imported into endosomes ([Figure
31.4](/books/NBK453065/figure/ch31.f4/?report=objectonly)). From there, the
protein moves by retrograde trafficking to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via
the _trans_ -Golgi network and Golgi apparatus. In the ER, the A and B chains
separate after reduction of the disulfide bond, perhaps through the action of
the ER enzyme, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI). Some fraction of the free A
chain, which may be partly denatured in the ER, may then escape from the ER by
retrotranslocation through the Sec61 translocon and thereby enter the
cytoplasm. This retrotranslocation may involve the quality control system in
the ER known as ER-associated degradation (ERAD), which is involved in
removing misfolded proteins from the ER (see [Chapter
36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). Some of the A chain may be ubiquitinated and
degraded in the proteasome, but the A chain may not be an efficient substrate
for ubiquitination because it has few lysine residues.

In the cytoplasm, just a few molecules of ricin A chain appear to be
sufficient to kill cells. The A chain is an RNA N-glycosidase that cleaves one
adenine residue (A4324) in the exposed GAGA tetraloop of the 28S RNA in the
eukaryotic 60S ribosomal subunit. This deletion results in a loss of binding
of elongation factor-2 and the inability of the ribosome to promote protein
synthesis.

The toxins abrin, modeccin from _Adenia digitata_ , _Viscum album_ agglutinin
(viscumin, VAA, or mistletoe lectin), and volkensin also have R-type domains,
belong to the RIP-II class, and kill cells in a manner similar to ricin. There
are other R-type plant lectins in the RIP-II class that are not toxic, and
these include several proteins from the genus _Sambucus_ (elderberry), such as
nigrin-b, sieboldin-b, ebulin-f, and ebulin-r. All of the B subunits of these
proteins appear to bind Gal/GalNAc, but they may have some differences in
affinity and may recognize different Gal/GalNAc-containing glycoconjugates.
Interestingly, cell lines selected for resistance to killing by modeccin are
not resistant to abrin and ricin, and vice versa.

In addition to RCA-I and ricin, other plant lectins with R-type domains
include the ricin homolog from _A. precatorius_ and the bark lectins from the
elderberry plant, _Sambucus sieboldiana_ lectin (SSA) and _Sambucus nigra_
agglutinin (SNA). SSA and SNA are unusual in that they are the only [R-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/rtypelectins/) that bind well to
α2-6-linked sialic acid (Sia)-containing ligands and they do not bind to
α2-3-linked sialylated ligands. SSA and SNA are heterotetramers (∼140 kDa)
composed of two heterodimers each containing an A chain (which resembles ricin
A chain) disulfide-bonded to a B chain (which binds glycans and is an R-type
lectin). The A chain in these proteins has very weak RIP-II activity in vitro.
SSA and SNA may have the same overall organization as RCA-I (see [Figure
28.1](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/figure/ch28.f1/?report=objectonly)). Other plant
lectins with the R-type domain include lectins from the seeds of
_Trichosanthes dioica_ and _Trichosanthes anguina_ , which also appear to bind
β-linked galactose.

Two other plant lectins that can bind to sialylated glycans are from the
leguminous tree _Maackia amurensis_. Although these lectins are discussed
here, they do not show a classical R-type domain but instead have an L-type
lectin domain (see [Chapter 32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/)). _M. amurensis_
leukoagglutinin (MAL ) (also referred to commercially as MAL-I and MAA-I)
recognizes Siaα2-3Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ-Man-R and does not bind to isomers containing
Sia in α2-6 linkage. MAL can also bind to sulfated (rather than sialylated)
glycans with the sequence sulfate-3Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ-Man-R. Interestingly, MAL is
a very poor hemagglutinin (HA) because human red cells lack such ligand
structures, but these sequences are abundant on leukocytes and hence the
lectin is a strong leukoagglutinin. There is a second lectin in _M. amurensis_
termed _M. amurensis_ hemagglutinin (MAH) (MAL-II or MAA-II) that binds
differently from MAL; MAH binds well to the sialylated core 1 O-glycan
Siaα2-3Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-Ser/Thr.

The R-type lectin domain is found in many mammalian enzymes, as discussed
below, as well as other animal lectins, including the mannose receptor (MR)
family ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), and in some invertebrate
lectins. EW29 is a galactose-binding lectin from the annelid (earthworm)
_Lumbricus terrestris_. The R-type domain is also found in pierisin-1, which
is a cytotoxic protein from the cabbage butterfly _Pieris rapae_ , and in the
homologous protein pierisin-2, from _Pieris brassicae_. Pierisin-1 is
extremely toxic to animal cells in culture and binds through its R-type domain
to glycosphingolipids (GSLs) (e.g., globotriaosylce-ramide [Gb3] and
globotetraosylceramide [Gb4]). Both the catalytic domain and the lectin
domains of pierisin-1 are in the same polypeptide. The mechanism by which the
catalytic domain enters the cytoplasm is not well understood, but it may
involve proteolysis to separate the domains.

Some other proteins with the R-type lectin domain are also enzymes and these
are found in both animals and microbes. For example, Limulus horseshoe crab
coagulation factor G has a subunit that is a serine protease and also has a
central R-type lectin domain, which is flanked at the amino terminus by a
xylanase Z-like domain and at the carboxyl terminus by a glucanase-like
domain. Additional examples of of other microbial and animal proteins with
R-type domains include _Streptomyces lividans_ xylanase 10A, the mosquitocidal
toxin (MTX) from _Bacillus sphaericus_ , and CEL-III, a hemolytic lectin from
the sea cucumber _Cucumaria echinata_ , which binds to Gal/GalNAc and requires
Ca++. CEL-III can undergo a conformation change that acts like complement to
cause hemolysis of the target cell.

There are four known members of the human MR family, all of which contain an
R-type lectin domain, and a fifth member FcRY in birds. The human MR family
includes the MR, the phospholipase A2 (PLA2) receptor, DEC-205/MR6-gp200, and
Endo180/urokinase plasminogen activator receptor-associated protein ([Figure
31.1](/books/NBK453065/figure/ch31.f1/?report=objectonly)). All of these
proteins are large type I transmembrane glycoproteins and they contain a
single fibronectin type II domain, multiple C-type lectin domains (CTLDs)
([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), and an amino-terminal cysteine-rich
domain. Some of the CTLDs in the MR and Endo180 bind glycans, but other CTLDs
in these proteins do not bind glycans and have other functions. Each protein
is a recycling plasma membrane receptor with a cytoplasmic domain that
mediates clathrin-dependent endocytosis and uptake of extracellular glycan-
containing ligands. All of the MR family members except DEC-205 recycle back
to the cell surface from early endosomes, but DEC-205 recycles from late
endosomes. However, each receptor has evolved to have distinct functions and
distributions. These receptors are unusual among animal lectins in that they
can bind ligands in either a “ _cis”_ or “ _trans”_ fashion, which means they
can bind to cell-surface glycoconjugates on the same cell or to those on other
cells and to soluble ligands.

The MR (CD206) is important in the innate and adaptive immune systems. It is
expressed at high levels on hepatic endothelial cells and Kupffer cells as
well as on many other endothelial and epithelial cells, macrophages, and
immature dendritic cells (DCs). The MR is part of the innate immune system and
it facilitates the phagocytosis of mannose-rich pathogens. It also assists
leukocytes in responding appropriately to antigens by promoting trafficking to
the germinal center and is also involved in antigen presentation. The receptor
was originally discovered in the 1980s in rabbit alveolar macrophages as a
large membrane protein (175 kDa) that bound mannose-containing ligands as well
as pituitary hormones such as lutropin and thyrotropin, which have 4- _O_
-sulfated _N_ -acetylgalactosamine residues on N-glycans. However, although
the MR is a C-type lectin with multiple CTLDs (see [Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), it also contains an cysteine-rich R-type domain
that binds sulfated glycans on pituitary hormones and causes their clearance
from the circulation.

Interestingly, the MR and other members of the MR family are among the few
mammalian GBPs that have two separate lectin motifs (C-type and R-type) in the
same polypeptide. This group is also unusual in that it is the only known
lectin group in mammals with more than two CTLDs in the same molecule. Only
CTLDs 4 and 5 of the MR have been shown to bind glycans in a Ca++-dependent
manner and to bind mannose, _N_ -acetylglucosamine, and fucose.

The R-type domain of the MR binds other sulfated glycans and also N-glycans on
pituitary glycoprotein hormones containing 4-SO4-GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-R.
Other ligands for the MR include chondroitin-4-sulfate proteoglycans on
leukocytes that also contain 4-SO4-GalNAc β1-R residues and perhaps sulfated
glycans, such as those containing 3-O-sulfated galactose, 3-O-sulfated Lex,
and 3-O-sulfated Lea. The cysteine-rich R-type domain in the MR binds with
relatively low affinity to sulfated monosaccharides (Kd in the range of 10−3
to 10−4 m), but oligomeric forms of the protein probably display much higher
avidity for glycoproteins with multiple sulfated glycans. Interestingly,
although the cysteine-rich R-type domain binds sulfated glycans, the CTLDs
bind unsulfated glycans and may also play a role in glycoprotein homeostasis
and clearance.

The MR is also unusual in that it is the only member of the MR family that can
function both in clathrin-dependent endocytosis and in the phagocytosis of
nonopsinized microbes and large ligands. The MR can bind many different
microorganisms, including _Candida albicans_ , _Pneumocystis carinii_ ,
_Leishmania donovani_ , _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ , and _Klebsiella
pneumoniae_. The MR may distinguish self from nonself glycans via its
multivalent attachment to the mannose-rich glycoconjugates on these organisms,
which are presented in unique clusters. The MR also functions in adaptive
immunity through its ability to deliver antigens to major histocompatibility
(MHC) class II compartments and through its cleavage and release as a soluble
protein into blood. Interestingly, it is speculated that the membrane-bound MR
may bind antigens through its CTLDs and then, following proteolytic cleavage,
the soluble MR bound to its cargo may move to germinal centers where it may
bind via its R-type domain to macrophages and DCs expressing ligands such as
sialoadhesion or CD45 that may contain sulfated glycans.

The PLA2 receptor (PLA2R) was discovered as a receptor for PLA2 neurotoxins in
snake venoms and was referred to as the M-type PLA2 receptor to distinguish it
from the neuronal or N-type PLA2R. The cDNA encoding this 180-kDa glycoprotein
has homology with the MR (with 29% identity). It can occur as both a long form
that is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein with a domain structure like the
MR and a shorter form that is secreted. The membrane-bound form can function
as an endocytic receptor to internalize PLA2 ligands. In animal cells,
secreted PLA2s represent a large family of enzymes that are important in the
degradation of phospholipids and the release of arachidonic acid, which is the
precursor for prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes, and prostacyclins.
The murine PLA2 receptor binds to sPLA2-X enzyme, but the human PLA2R may bind
to several different PLA2 isozymes. Although early studies suggested that the
PLA2R might be involved in clearance of PLA2s, murine knockouts for the PLA2R
had the unusual phenotype of resistance to endotoxic shock. This suggested
that the PLA2R might be important in regulating production of proinflammatory
cytokines by soluble PLA2s. Thus, the PLA2R might function in signal
transduction mediated by PLA2 binding. Some of the CTLDs in the PLA2R function
by binding PLA2 ligands, rather than binding directly to glycan ligands. The
fibronectin type II domain binds to collagen, which is a feature shared by
this domain in other MR family members, except for possibly DEC-205. Recently,
PLA2R is an autoantigen in adult idiopathic membranous nephropathy (MN).

DEC-205 is a 205-kDa member of the MR family that is expressed by dermal DCs
and, at a lower level, by epidermal Langerhans cells. It is also expressed on
some epithelial cells, on bone marrow stroma, and by endothelial cells. It was
identified originally in the 1980s by a monoclonal antibody NLDC-145, which
recognized a surface antigen (SAG) on Langerhans cells. DEC-205 is important
in the recognition and internalization of antigens for presentation to T
cells. Upon endocytosis, DEC-205 internalizes to late endosomes/lysosomes and
recycles to the surface. Expression of DEC-205 is enhanced in both types of
cells upon cell maturation induced by inflammatory stimuli. None of the 10
CTLDs in DEC-205 has the conserved amino acids known to be important in
carbohydrate binding, and thus far there is no evidence that these domains
bind glycans, but they bind unknown ligands on apoptic cells.

Endo180 was found to be part of a trimolecular cell-surface complex with
urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR) and was termed
the uPAR-associated protein or uPARAP. It was also discovered as a novel
antigen on macrophages and human fibroblasts. Like the MR, Endo180 is
expressed on macrophages, but Endo180 is also expressed on fibroblasts and
chondrocytes, some endothelial cells, and tissues undergoing ossification. The
cysteine-rich R-type domain at the amino terminus of Endo180 has been shown to
be unable to bind sulfated glycans. The function of this domain is unknown.
Endo180 is predicted to be important in remodeling of the extracellular matrix
(ECM). It binds to the carboxy-terminal region of type I collagen, and
collagens type II, IV, and V, through its FN II domain, and binds to uPA and
uPAR, but whether glycan recognition is important for these interactions is
not known. Endo180 (CD280) binds in a Ca++-dependent manner to _N_
-acetylglucosamine, mannose, and fucose through CTLD2, and this is the only
domain that contains all of the conserved amino acids for binding both Ca++
and sugar. Endo180 is an endocytic receptor for these soluble ligands and may
be important in matrix turnover. In addition, cells expressing Endo180 show
enhanced adhesion to matrixes, suggesting that Endo180 may also be important
in cell adhesion.

[Mucin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/mucin/)-type O-glycans have the common
core structure of GalNAcα1-Ser/Thr ([Figure
31.5](/books/NBK453065/figure/ch31.f5/?report=objectonly)), which may be
further modified by addition of Gal or GalNAc residues ([Chapters
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/) and [14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Remarkably,
recent studies show that the vast majority (>80%) of all proteins passing
through the secretory apparatus have at least one Ser or Thr residues modified
with α-linked GalNAc. Modification of Ser/Thr residues is dependent on a
family of UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide α-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases
(ppGalNAcTs) that function in the Golgi apparatus. Such enzymes are found in
all animals. Twenty genes encoding ppGalNAcTs have been identified in humans;
there are 19 in rodents and 14 in Drosophila ([Chapters
6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/) and [9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). These ppGalNAcTs may
be separated into two general classes: those that can transfer _N_
-acetylgalactosamine from UDP-GalNAc to unmodified polypeptide acceptors, and
those that prefer acceptor glycopeptides containing GalNAc-Ser/Thr (i.e., a
set predicted to have a [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)). These enzymes are very large
proteins and have a unique multidomain structure. The enzymes are all type II
transmembrane proteins and have an amino-terminal catalytic domain and a
carboxy-terminal R-type domain of about 130 amino acid residues. This R-type
domain has the QxW repeat function as lectins during the catalytic process of
these enzymes.

Crystal structures of members of this enzyme family show the catalytic and
R-type domain function dynamically with polypeptide substrates. For example,
in ppGalNAc-T2, the catalytic domain interacts with the peptide in a peptide-
binding grove, whereas the R-type lectin domain interacts primarily with the
GalNAc residue in modified peptides. The proximity of these two interactions
helps to position the enzyme to attack special acceptor peptides. Such
specificities among the multiple ppGalNAcTs allows the family to have
tremendous coverage over a wide range of polypeptide substrates and confers
specificity on these enzymes in terms of particular Ser/Thr acceptor sites.

A feature of many microbial glycosidases is the presence of both a catalytic
domain and an R-type domain in CBM13 family. _S. lividans_ endo-β1-4xylanase
10A (Xyn10A) is a good example of such an enzyme. Xyn10A catalyzes the
cleavage of β1-4xylans and can bind to xylan and a variety of small soluble
sugars, including galactose, lactose, and xylo- and arabino-oligosaccharides.
The catalytic domain is at the amino terminus and the carboxyl terminus has an
R-type β-trefoil motif. As mentioned above, the R-type domain CBM represents
the CBM13 family in the [CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/) database. In Xyn10A, all
of the original β-trefoil sugar-binding motifs are retained, along with the
conserved disulfide bridges, and evidence suggests that each of the three
potential sugar-binding sites in the β-trefoil structure interact with sugars
and each site may span up to four xylose residues. The binding to
monosaccharides is very weak (Kd in the range of 10−2 to 10−3 m), but
multivalent binding avidity to polysaccharides can be very strong.

Actinohivin is an actinomycete-derived lectin in the CBP module famly 13 that
binds to clustered mannose residues of the high-mannose-type glycans commonly
found on the viral envelope of human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1).
Actinohivin is small (114 aa) and has three sugar binding pockets within its
β-trefoil structure.

The authors acknowledge contributions to the previous version of this chapter
from the Second Edition by Marilynn E. Etzler and helpful comments and
suggestions from Sumit Rai and Patience Sanderson.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.032

The [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/) occur in the
seeds of leguminous plants, and they have structural motifs that are present
in a variety of glycan-binding proteins (GBPs) from other eukaryotic
organisms. The structures of many of these lectins have been characterized,
and many L-type lectins are used in a wide range of biomedical and analytical
procedures. This chapter discusses the structure–function relationships of
these lectins and the various biological roles they have in different
organisms.

The [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/) have a rich
history going back to the end of the 19th century, when it was found that
extracts from the seeds of leguminous plants (Fabaceae family but also called
the Leguminosae family) could agglutinate red blood cells. These agglutinins
(later named lectins) were found to be soluble proteins that are abundant in
the seeds of leguminous plants. Different species of legumes were found to
differ in hemagglutination specificity. Much work on these proteins was
performed in the early part of the 20th century, including the crystallization
of concanavalin A (ConA; the hemagglutinin [HA] from jack beans), which was
first isolated by James Sumner in 1919 and crystallized in 1936 and was the
first commercially available lectin. The legume lectins were also found to
have hemagglutinating properties because of their ability to bind glycans on
the cell surface.

The abundance of these proteins in the soluble extracts of legume seeds (up to
∼5%–10% total protein) enabled many lectins to be isolated and characterized.
Such seed lectins have considerable amino acid sequence homology, and the
variety of carbohydrate-binding specificities found among these lectins made
them useful tools in a wide variety of analytical and biomedical procedures.

The crystal structures of a number of legume seed lectins allowed the
identification of the carbohydrate-binding sites. Structural similarities in
the tertiary structures were identified among these lectins and several other
lectins, including the galectins (see [Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)), as
will be discussed in this chapter. For this reason, the term “[L-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/)” has recently been
designated as a classification for all proteins with this legume seed lectin-
like protein structure.

The [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/) are
distinguished from other lectins primarily on the basis of tertiary structure
and not the primary sequence. In general, either the entire lectin monomer or
the carbohydrate-recognition domains (CRDs) of the more complex lectins is
composed of antiparallel β-sheets connected by short loops and β-bends, and
they usually lack any α-helices. These sheets form a dome-like structure
related to the “jelly-roll fold,” and it is often called a “lectin fold.” The
carbohydrate-binding site is generally localized toward the apex of this dome.
The tertiary structure of the monomer of ConA, the lectin from the seeds of
the legume _Canavalia ensiformis_ , is shown in [Figure
32.1](/books/NBK453092/figure/ch32.f1/?report=objectonly). The crystal
structures of at least 20 other legume L-type lectin monomers have been
determined by high-resolution [X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/xraycrystallography/) and are almost superimposable on this structure.
Thus, it is not surprising that the primary amino acid sequences of legume
lectins show remarkable homology with one another, as well as with the
sequences of many other legume seed lectins sequenced but not yet
crystallized. Fewer, but significant, homologies in primary structure have
been found between legume L-type lectins compared with some L-type lectins
from far distant sources, such as ERGIC-53 and VIP36. Yet, in other L-type
lectins, no homology is found with the seed lectins, although they contain
similar lectin folds. For example, a comparison of the tertiary structure of
the legume soybean lectin with the structure of human galectin-3 shows that
both proteins contain the typical L-type lectin fold, but no amino acid
sequence homology exists between the two lectins ([Figure
32.2](/books/NBK453092/figure/ch32.f2/?report=objectonly)).

Relationships between sequences of [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/ltypelectins/) from legumes compared with the phylogeny of the various
species within the Fabaceae family of plants suggest that these lectins most
probably arose from divergent evolution. It remains an open possibility that
the tertiary structures of some of the other members of the “L-type lectin
family” arose by convergent evolution. It must also be noted that for a
protein to be firmly placed in the L-type lectin category it must have the
lectin fold and glycan-binding activity.

All soluble [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/) found
to date are multimeric proteins, although all do not have the same quaternary
structure. Thus, these lectins are multivalent with more than one glycan-
binding site per lectin molecule. The same multivalent principle applies to
the membrane bound L-type lectins because the presence of two or more
molecules on a membrane surface essentially presents a multivalent situation.
In addition to increasing the avidity of the lectins for branched and/or cell-
surface glycans, this multivalence can have great biological significance.
Binding of the lectins to the cell surface can lead to aggregation of specific
glycan receptors, which can promote a variety of biological responses such as
mitogenesis and various signal transduction processes.

Plant [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/) are
primarily found in the seeds of leguminous plants and are synthesized during
seed development several weeks after flowering; they are transported to the
vacuole where they become condensed into specialized vesicles called protein
bodies. They are stable during desiccation of the seeds and can remain in that
state indefinitely until the seeds germinate. They represent one of several
classes of proteins stored in high concentrations in the seeds and are often
called storage proteins. During seed germination, the storage bodies become
the vacuoles of the cotyledons, which appear as the first leafy appendages of
the plant. During the first week of development, these cotyledons provide food
for the plant and eventually shrivel up and disappear. L-type lectins have
also been found in the bark of some leguminous trees, and very low amounts of
these lectins are also found in other vegetative tissues of legumes. In some
cases, these latter lectins have been found to be encoded by separate but very
similar genes. More than 100 of the seed legume L-type lectins have been
characterized, and are the most extensively studied proteins of this class.

A common feature of the legume [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/ltypelectins/) is their oligomeric structure. The structures of the
monomers consist of three antiparallel β-sheets: a flat six-stranded “back”
sheet, a concave seven-stranded “front” sheet, and a short “top” sheet that
keeps the two major sheets together ([Figure
32.1A](/books/NBK453092/figure/ch32.f1/?report=objectonly),B). All of these
lectins require Ca++ and a transition metal ion (usually Mn++) for their
carbohydrate-binding activity. The glycan-binding and metal-binding sites are
localized in close proximity to each other at the top of the “front” sheet.

The glycan-binding site is composed of four loops: A, B, C, and D ([Figure
32.3](/books/NBK453092/figure/ch32.f3/?report=objectonly), top). These loops
contain four invariant amino acids that are essential for carbohydrate binding
([Figure 32.3](/books/NBK453092/figure/ch32.f3/?report=objectonly), bottom).
Loop A contains an invariant aspartate, which forms hydrogen bonds between its
side chain and the glycan ligand. This amino acid is linked to its preceding
amino acid (usually alanine) by a rare _cis_ -peptide bond, which is
stabilized by the metal ions and is necessary for the proper orientation of
the aspartate in the combining site. Loop B contains an invariant glycine,
which also forms hydrogen bonds with the ligand. An exception to this case is
found in two lectins (ConA and the closely related _Dioclea grandiflora_
lectin) where the glycine is replaced with an arginine. Both the glycine and
arginine form hydrogen bonds with the ligand via their main-chain amides. Loop
C contains an invariant asparagine, which forms a hydrogen bond with the
ligand via its side chain. This loop also contains an invariant hydrophobic
amino acid.

The legume [L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/) are
generally classified into groups based on their carbohydrate specificities as
often identified by the ability of monosaccharides to inhibit their
agglutinating activity. These differences in specificities are brought about
by variability in the conformation and size of the D loop and to some extent
by the C loop. Although the main specificity regions of the legume lectins are
determined by the loops, there are sites other than these that contribute to
lectin specificity. There are several additional modes of refining these
specificities, such as interaction with water, posttranslational
modifications, and state of oligomerization.

Within these oligomeric proteins, the back β-sheet is involved in formation of
the oligomers, which are mostly dimeric or tetrameric in nature. A variety of
quaternary structures are found among the lectins. The dimeric and tetrameric
structures of ConA are shown in [Figure
32.1C](/books/NBK453092/figure/ch32.f1/?report=objectonly),D. Although some of
the other lectins occur as dimeric and tetrameric structures, several other
different orientations of the β-sheets account for the variability in dimeric
and tetrameric structures of other lectins in this class. Interestingly, some
legume lectins have a hydrophobic binding site that binds adenine and adenine-
derived plant hormones with micromolar affinity; this is two to three orders
of magnitude higher than their affinity for monosaccharides. Three of these
lectins (the soybean agglutinin, phytohemagglutinin L [PHAL], and _Dolichos
biflorus_ lectin) have been crystallized and found to have a unique tetrameric
structure, in that the dimer–dimer interface creates a channel running through
the center of the tetramer. Two identical adenine-binding sites are found at
opposite ends of this channel.

Another common feature of the legume lectins is that they are secretory
proteins and undergo cotranslational signal peptide removal, which accompanies
their entry into the secretory system. All but peanut agglutinin (PNA) are
N-glycosylated as precursors; the N-glycans undergo normal posttranslational
modification that occur as they transit the Golgi apparatus. The lectins vary
from one another as to whether the mature proteins contain oligomannose-type,
complex-type, or a mixture of both types of N-glycans. The lectins may also
undergo a variety of proteolytic modifications as they transit through the
secretory system. Some of the lectins are cleaved to generate a β-chain,
corresponding to the amino terminus and an α-chain corresponding to the
carboxyl terminus. For example, the pea lectin and favin (the lectin from
_Vicia faba_ ) are tetrameric glycoproteins that contain two types of
subunits, α and β, which are ∼5 kDa and ∼21 kDa, respectively. These two
lectins are each synthesized as single polypeptide precursors that contain the
sequences of both chains in the following orientation: β-chain–α-chain. The
chains associate to form dimers; they are then proteolytically processed in
the protein bodies to form tetramers containing two separate α- and β-chains.
Other lectins may undergo carboxy-terminal trimming of only some of their
subunits. For example, the soybean agglutinin, phytohemagglutinin E (E-PHA),
and _D. biflorus_ lectins are tetramers of equimolar mixtures of intact and
trimmed subunits.

The most intriguing proteolytic modification occurs in the case of ConA. A
small segment is removed from the interior of the protein and the original
amino terminus is ligated with the original carboxyl terminus. This forms what
is termed a circularly permuted protein. The N-glycosylated segment of the
protein is removed during this transpeptidation process; thus, the mature ConA
is not a glycoprotein, in contrast to most seed lectins in the Fabaceae
family, which have N-glycans.

Thus, the protein sequence of isolated ConA aligns with other seed lectins,
whereas the alignment of the DNA encoding the protein with other lectin genes
suggested that the gene is circularly permuted.

Despite years of research, the intrinsic biological roles of [L-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/) are poorly understood.
The glycan-binding specificity can vary significantly; ConA binds mannose and
glucose-containing glycans, whereas the lectins from the leguminous trees
_Maackia amurensis_ and _Sambucus nigra_ bind to sialylated glycans (see
[Chapters 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/) and [29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)). There
is evidence from many approaches that the legume lectins are insecticidal,
antifungal, and antimicrobial and can be toxic to animals that eat raw seeds.
Thus, the seed lectins may function in plant immunity as a type of pattern-
recognition receptor to protect the offspring of the plant. As highly abundant
seed constituents, the lectins could also serve as a storage protein for the
plant development. L-type lectins are involved in the symbiosis of plants with
nitrogen-fixing bacteria, such as in Rhizobium-legume symbiosis, but the
precise function of lectins in this regard is unclear. A recent study has
shown that the _D. biflorus_ seed lectin is also a lipoxygenase. It will be of
interest to see how many other L-type lectins have this activity, which is
necessary to initiate the wound-induced defense pathway in plants.

[Calnexin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/calnexin/) (CNX) and calreticulin
(CRT) are homologous protein chaperones that mediate quality control of
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (see [Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). Although CRT is a soluble ER luminal component,
CNX is membrane-bound and is perhaps closely associated with the protein-
translocating channel that imports nascent proteins into the ER. Both CNX and
CRT bind to monoglucosylated, high-mannose-type glycans and prevent their exit
from the ER until they are properly folded and assembled into correct
quaternary structures ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). During the
binding and dissociation from CRT or CNX, if the glycoprotein folds correctly,
then glucose removal by glucosidase-II allows its passage out of the ER. In
the event that a glycoprotein misfolds or aggregates, it is reglucosylated by
UDP-Glc:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (UGGT); this enzyme only recognizes
misfolded or aggregated glycoproteins. Following reglucosylation, the
monoglucosylated protein binds again to CRT or CNX. Thus, there is a cycle of
glucose removal and addition by the alternating actions of glucosidase-II and
UGGT and interactions with CNX/CRT.

Both CRT and CNX are Ca++-binding proteins, and their carbohydrate-binding
activity is sensitive to changes in Ca++ concentration. CNX is a type I
membrane protein with its carboxy-terminal end in the cytoplasm. The lumenal
portion of the protein is divided into three domains: a Ca++-binding domain
(which is adjacent to the transmembrane domain), a proline-rich long hairpin
loop called the P domain, and the amino-terminal L-type lectin domain. CRT has
a similar structure, but it is missing the cytoplasmic and transmembrane
regions; it is retained in the ER through its KDEL-retrieval signal at the
carboxyl terminus ([Figure
32.4](/books/NBK453092/figure/ch32.f4/?report=objectonly)).

ERGIC-53 (human gene _LMAN1_ ) and its sequence-related proteins ERGL and
VIP36 are type I membrane proteins that participate in vesicular protein
transport in the secretory system (see [Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)).
All share an L-type lectin folding motif. Orthologs of ERGIC-53 are found in
plants and all animals and have been independently identified as being
important in production of infectious viruses (e.g., coronavirus and
filovirus). ERGIC-53 occurs in the ER–Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC),
and its cytoplasmic carboxyl terminus contains the dilysine/diphenylalanine
KKFF retention/retrieval motif. The dilysine is recognized by the COPI
coatomer complex; this binding enables the coated vesicles to be recycled from
the ERGIC back to the ER. The diphenylalanine helps to direct the COPII-coated
vesicles to ER export sites by binding to the COPII coatomer. The location of
VIP36 (vesicular integral membrane protein 36) is uncertain; overexpressed
protein has been found in both the ER and ERGIC, as well as _cis_ -Golgi.
ERGIC 53 can associate with the soluble ER partner MCFD2 (multiple coagulation
factor deficiency protein 2), which forms a cargo receptor complex important
in factor V and VIII biosynthesis. Human mutations in ERGIC-53 are associated
with deficiencies of circulating blood clotting factors V and VIII, which are
glycoproteins with multiple N-glycans. LMAN1-deficient mice show FV and FVIII
deficiencies and liver ER distension, with accumulation of α1-antitrypsin and
GRP78. Partially penetrant, perinatal lethality occurs, dependent on inbred
genetic background, suggesting potential roles for as yet unidentified
LMAN1-dependent cargo proteins (PMID: 21795745).

Both ERGIC-53 and VIP36 bind to oligomannose-type glycans and require Ca++ for
their carbohydrate-binding activity. These two proteins were the first animal
lectins that were found to share some sequence and structural homology with
the legume seed lectins. Although the overall sequence identity of these
proteins to the seed lectins is only ∼19%–24%, those amino acids important for
metal and carbohydrate binding in the seed lectins are conserved, including
the invariant aspartate, glycine, and asparagine. The invariant aspartate also
participates in a _cis_ -peptide bond with its preceding amino acid; this is
similar to the case of the legume seed lectins discussed in the above section.
The crystal structure of the [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) of ERGIC-53 has been determined and
confirms the structural similarity of these lectins. ERGL (ERGIC-53-like)
lacks some of the key sugar-binding residues and its function is unclear. VIPL
(VIP36-like) is an ER resident protein and also functionally able to bind
oligomannose-type glycans, as well as associate with ERGIC-53, which may be
important in regulating ERGIC-53 localization.

A variety of other proteins have been described that have carbohydrate-binding
domains with tertiary structures similar to the L-type lectin fold and may be
considered as members of this family. Members of the galectin family of
lectins also fit into this category and are the subject of a separate chapter
in this volume (see [Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)). Other GBPs that may
fit into this category are briefly discussed below.

The pentraxins are a superfamily of plasma proteins that are involved in
innate immunity in invertebrates and vertebrates and are designated as
pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs). They contain L-type lectin folds and
require Ca++ ions for ligand binding. Their name is based on the pentameric
arrangement of their subunits. The short pentraxins, C-reactive protein (CRP),
which binds phosphocholine residues on polysaccharides and on phospholipids,
and the serum amyloid P (SAP) component, which also binds carbohydrate
derivatives on bacterial polysaccharides and to amyloid fibrils, are acute-
phase proteins in humans and mice, respectively. This family also contains
long pentraxins that have an unrelated long amino-terminal domain coupled to
the pentraxin domain. PTX3 is one of these long pentraxins; in addition to its
role in innate immunity, PTX3 may help in the assembly of a hyaluronan-rich
extracellular matrix (ECM), which may involve binding to the hyaluronan–heavy
chain-1 complex (inter-α-trypsin inhibitor or IαI or ITI) and regulation by
TNF-stimulated gene-6 (TSG-6).

Laminin G domain-like (LG) modules are made of 180–200 amino acid residues and
were first identified in laminins. The carboxyl terminus of the laminin
α-chain has five tandem lamnin G domains, which are important in heparin and
sulfatide binding and cell/basement membrane adhesion, such as to the novel
glycans of α-dystroglycan (α-DG). Some LG modules share binding properties for
cellular receptors and carbohydrate ligands, indicating that the LG fold may
have evolved from the L-type lectin fold for participation in related
functions.

VP4 is the surface spike protein in rotaviruses and is proteolytically cleaved
to generate VP8, which is a glycan-binding protein, and VP5, a hydrophobic
region required for membrane entry. VP8 has an L-type lectin fold and
structural features in common with galectins. This domain is required for
infectivity of most animal rotaviruses. In some rotavirus strains, VP8 binds
sialylated glycans, whereas most rotavirus VP8 binds type 1 and/or type 2 N-
or O-glycans lacking sialic acid (Sia) and can especially bind to human milk
oligosaccharides with appropriate sequences.

A number of proteins are known to contain the jelly-roll motif found in
[L-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ltypelectins/). These include
the binding domain of _Clostridium_ neurotoxins, which can bind to
gangliosides (e.g., GT1b and GD1b); _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ exotoxin A in
which one of its three domains, the amino-terminal domain Ia, displays an
L-type lectin structure; _Vibrio cholerae_ sialidase, a three-domain protein
with a six-bladed β-propeller neuraminidase domain flanked by two L-type
lectin domains; and the Leech intramolecular _trans_ -sialidase (TS), which
has a multidomain architecture with a lectin-like domain II and an irregular
β-stranded domain III that is built around a canonical catalytic domain C.

Although the L-type lectin domain occurs in several proteins, in many cases
evidence for carbohydrate binding and/or specificity is lacking. Examples
include the L-type lectin receptor kinases (LecRKs) in plants, which is a
large family comprised of dozens of membrane receptors that are key to plant
development, immunity, and adaptive responses to stimuli; and mammalian
thrombospondins, such as TSP-1, which has a carboxy-terminal domain that shows
the typical β-sandwich of two curved antiparallel β-sheets, a feature of the
jelly-roll topology, in which the L-type lectin domain is compactly assembled
with three calcium-binding type 3 (T3) repeats.

This domain II may be involved in carbohydrate recognition through sugar ring
and aromatic side-chain interactions, as observed in many lectins.

The authors acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Oliver Pearce.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.033

Lysosomes are intracellular membrane-bound organelles that turn over and
degrade many types of macromolecules, via the action of lysosomal enzymes
(also called acid hydrolases because of the low-pH characteristic of
lysosomes). These enzymes are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) on
membrane-bound ribosomes and traverse the ER–Golgi pathway along with other
newly synthesized proteins. At the terminal Golgi compartment, they are
segregated from other glycoproteins and selectively delivered to lysosomes. In
most “higher” animal cells, this specialized trafficking is achieved primarily
through the recognition of N-glycans containing mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) by
“P-type” lectins. As the first clear-cut example of a biological role for
glycans on mammalian glycoproteins and the first shown link between
glycoprotein biosynthesis and human disease, the interesting history of its
discovery is described in some detail. More recent data on other proteins with
“P-type” lectin domains are also mentioned.

Early studies of human genetic storage disorders by Elizabeth Neufeld
indicated a failure to degrade cellular components, which therefore
accumulated in lysosomes ([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). Soluble
corrective factors from normal cells could reverse these defects when added to
the culture media. These factors were later identified as lysosomal enzymes
that were found to be deficient in patients with storage disorder diseases.
These enzymes, secreted in small quantities by normal cells in culture, or by
cells from patients with a different “complementary” defect ([Figure
33.1](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f1/?report=objectonly)), exist in two
forms: a high-uptake form, recognized by saturable, high-affinity receptors
that could correct the defect in deficient cells, and an inactive low-uptake
form that could not correct the defect.

Fibroblasts from patients with a rare genetic disease showing prominent
inclusion bodies in cultured cells (therefore termed I-cell disease) were
found to be deficient in almost all lysosomal enzymes. Interestingly, all of
these enzymes are actually synthesized by I-cells, but are mostly secreted
into the medium, instead of being retained in lysosomes. Neufeld showed that
although I-cells incorporate the high-uptake enzymes secreted by normal cells,
enzymes secreted by I-cells are not taken up by other cells ([Figure
33.1](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f1/?report=objectonly)). She therefore
proposed that I-cell disease results from a failure to add a common
recognition marker to lysosomal enzymes. This marker was assumed to be
responsible for the proper trafficking of newly synthesized enzymes to
lysosomes in normal cells. Because the high-uptake property was destroyed by
strong periodate treatment, which oxidizes vicinal hydroxyl groups in sugars,
it was predicted that the recognition marker was a glycan.

High uptake of lysosomal enzymes was next found by William Sly to be blocked
by M6P and its stereoisomer fructose 1-phosphate, but not by other sugar
phosphates. Treatment of lysosomal enzymes with alkaline phosphatase also
abolished high-uptake activity. By this time, the general pathway for N-glycan
processing had been defined (see [Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Because
oligomannosyl N-glycans are rich in mannose residues, these were predicted to
be phosphorylated on lysosomal enzymes. Indeed, the M6P moiety detected on
oligomannosyl N-glycans was released by endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase H (endo
H) from high-uptake forms of lysosomal enzymes, confirming the hypothesis.
Surprisingly, the groups of Stuart Kornfeld and Kurt von Figura then found
that a portion of the M6P moieties were “blocked” by α-linked _N_
-acetylglucosamine residues attached to the phosphate residue, creating a
phosphodiester.

Comparison of glycans with phosphodiesters and phosphomonoesters predicted
that the metabolic precursor of the M6P determinant was a phosphodiester and
that phosphorylation was mediated not by an ATP-dependent kinase but by a UDP-
GlcNAc-dependent GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. This was proven using a double-
labeled donor and Golgi extracts:

Reactants: Uridine-P-32P-[6-3H]GlcNAc+Manα1-(N-glycan)-lysosomal enzyme,

Products: Uridine-P+[6-3H]GlcNAcα1-32P-6-Manα1-(N-glycan)-lysosomal enzyme.

Another Golgi enzyme was shown to remove the outer _N_ -acetylglucosamine
residue and uncover the M6P moiety. Pulse-chase studies confirmed the order of
events, documenting that multiple glycans on a given lysosomal enzyme could
acquire one or two phosphate residues and that removal of some mannose
residues on the N-glycan by processing Golgi mannosidases was also required
([Figure 33.2](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f2/?report=objectonly)). In most
cell types, the phosphate is eventually lost from the M6P, presumably after
exposure to acid phosphatase in lysosomes. Thus, the overall biochemical
pathway is as follows:

![Image ch33uf01.jpg](/books/NBK453066/bin/ch33uf01.jpg)

The first two enzymes that mediate these reactions were then purified and
characterized and the genes encoding these proteins were cloned. UDP-
GlcNAc:lysosomal enzyme GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase (GlcNAc-P-T) is an α2β2γ2
complex encoded by two genes. The α and β subunits are encoded by the _GNPTAB_
gene, whose 1256 amino acid type-III transmembrane product undergoes
proteolysis in the Golgi to give rise to the two subunits, whereas the 305
amino acid γ-subunit is encoded by the _GNPTG_ gene ([Figure
33.3](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f3/?report=objectonly)). The α/β subunits
contain the catalytic function of the enzyme (Stealth domains) as well as
elements (Notch1, Notch2, and DMAP [DNA methylase-associated protein]) that
mediate binding to protein determinants present on the lysosomal enzymes. The
γ-subunit facilitates the phosphorylation of a subset of the lysosomal
enzymes. It contains an M6P receptor homology (MRH) domain that is thought to
bind oligomannosyl N-glycans on the lysosomal enzymes and present them to the
catalytic site for phosphorylation, and a DMAP recognition domain. The second
enzyme, α-N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester glycosidase encoded by the
_NAGPA_ gene, is a 272-kDa complex of four identical 68-kDa subunits, arranged
as two disulfide-linked homodimers. Unlike other Golgi enzymes, this is a
type-I membrane-spanning glycoprotein with its amino terminus in the lumen of
the Golgi.

The oligomannosyl N-glycans of lysosomal enzymes are identical to those of
many other glycoproteins passing through the ER–Golgi pathway. Thus, specific
recognition by GlcNAc-P-T is crucial to achieve selective trafficking. This
recognition is not explained by any similarities in the primary polypeptide
sequences of lysosomal enzymes. Indeed, denatured lysosomal enzymes lose their
specialized GlcNAc-P-T acceptor activity, indicating that features of
secondary or tertiary structure are critical for recognition. Two
complementary approaches have been used to define elements of this recognition
marker. In loss-of-function studies, various amino acids of the lysosomal
enzyme have been replaced with alanine, with the effect on phosphorylation
determined. In gain-of-function experiments, residues of the lysosomal
protease cathepsin D have been substituted into the homologous secretory
protease glycopepsinogen. These studies revealed that selected lysine residues
have a critical role in the interaction with GlcNAc-P-T. In fact, as few as
two lysines in the correct orientation to each other and to an N-glycan can
serve as minimal elements of the recognition domain. However, additional amino
acid residues function to enhance the interaction with GlcNAc-P-T. In some
instances (e.g., cathepsin D), the enzyme may contain a very extended
determinant, or perhaps, more than one recognition domain.

The GlcNAc phosphodiester glycosidase that catalyzes the exposure of the M6P
recognition marker is found primarily in the _trans_ -Golgi network (TGN), and
it cycles between this compartment and the plasma membrane. Thus, uncovering
the recognition marker is a late event in the Golgi apparatus, occurring just
before loading of the enzymes onto the M6P receptors (MPRs).

Analysis of fibroblasts from patients with I-cell disease (also called
mucolipidosis-II; ML-II) revealed a deficiency in GlcNAc-P-T enzyme activity.
A milder variant called pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy (mucolipidosis-III; ML-
III) showed a less severe deficiency of enzyme activity. Metabolic
radiolabeling of fibroblasts corroborated the failure to phosphorylate mannose
residues in these diseases, and asymptomatic obligate heterozygotes showed a
partial deficiency, with slightly elevated levels of serum lysosomal enzymes.
Mutations of various types in the two GlcNAc-P-T genes have since been
detected in all examined patients with ML-II and -III, indicating that
deficiency of this enzyme is the primary genetic cause of the disorder.

The first candidate (∼275-kDa) receptor for the M6P recognition marker was
isolated by affinity chromatography and was found to bind M6P in the absence
of cations (CI-MPR [cation-independent mannose 6-phoshate receptor]). Certain
cells deficient in this receptor still showed M6P-inhibitable binding of
lysosomal enzymes, leading to the discovery of a second MPR of ∼45 kDa, which
required divalent cations for optimal binding (CD-MPR [cation-dependent MPR]).
Both receptors bind with highest affinity to glycans carrying two M6P residues
([Figure 33.2](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f2/?report=objectonly), structure
C) and poorly to molecules bearing GlcNAc-P-Man phosphodiesters ([Figure
33.2](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f2/?report=objectonly), structures A and
B). Binding to molecules carrying one M6P ([Figure
33.2](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f2/?report=objectonly), structure D) is
intermediate in affinity. Removal of outer mannose residues by processing
Golgi mannosidases enhances binding.

Genes encoding both MPRs have been cloned and extensively characterized. Both
are type I transmembrane glycoproteins with large extracytoplasmic domains,
transmembrane regions and carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic domains. The CI-MPR has
15 contiguous repetitive units of ∼145 amino acids with partial identity to
one another. The CD-MPR has a single extracellular domain, showing homology
with the repeating domains of the CI-MPR. Together with conservation of
certain intron–exon boundaries, this homology suggests that the two genes
evolved from a common ancestor. On the basis of their sequence relationships
and unique binding properties to M6P, the two MPRs have been formally
classified as [P-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ptypelectins/).
Structural homologs of the MPRs are present in yeast and Drosophila, but these
proteins lack M6P-binding ability.

The CD-MPR exists mainly as a dimer, with each monomer binding one M6P
residue. However, monomeric and tetrameric forms of the CD-MPR exist, and the
equilibrium between forms is affected by temperature, pH, and the presence of
ligands. The CI-MPR also seems to be a dimer in the membrane, although it
readily dissociates on solubilization. Two of its repeating units (3 and 9)
bind M6P phosphomonoesters with high affinity, a third (5) binds M6P
phosphodiesters with low affinity, and a fourth (15) binds both M6P
phosphomonoesters and diesters with equal affinity. Mutagenesis studies have
identified the specific residues of these receptors involved in M6P binding,
and crystal structures of several M6P-binding domains have been obtained in a
complex with M6P. The CD-MPR has been crystallized as a dimer, with each
monomer folded into a nine-stranded flattened β-barrel that has a striking
resemblance to the protein folds in avidin ([Figure
33.4](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f4/?report=objectonly)). The distance
between the two ligand-binding sites of the dimer provides a good explanation
for the differences in binding affinity shown by the CD-MPR toward various
lysosomal enzymes. The crystal structure of the amino-terminal 432 residues of
the CI-MPR, encompassing domains 1–3 (domain 3 is one of the M6P-binding
domains), has also been solved. Each domain shows a topology similar to that
of the CD-MPR, and the three domains assemble into a compact structure that
provides insight into the arrangement of the entire extracellular region of
the CI-MPR. The proposed model does not position the two M6P-binding domains
(3 and 9) sufficiently close to bind a single, diphosphorylated N-glycan. This
suggests that the high-affinity binding of this N-glycan is due to the
spanning of binding sites located on different monomers of the CI-MPR. An
alternative possibility is that the receptor is dynamic, with the spacing
between the two M6P-binding sites being flexible, to enhance interactions with
lysosomal enzymes containing phosphorylated glycans at various positions on
their protein backbones.

Targeted disruption of the CD-MPR gene in mice is associated with normal or
only slightly elevated levels of lysosomal enzymes in the circulation and an
otherwise grossly normal phenotype. However, thymocytes or primary cultured
fibroblasts from such mice show an increase in the amount of phosphorylated
lysosomal enzymes secreted into the medium. This indicates that there are
mechanisms that compensate for the deficiency in vivo. Intravenous injection
of inhibitors of other glycan-specific receptors capable of mediating
endocytosis (e.g., the mannose receptor of macrophages and the
asialoglycoprotein receptor of hepatocytes; see [Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)) give rise to a marked increase in lysosomal
enzymes in the serum of the deficient mice. Thus, such receptors are likely
part of the compensatory mechanisms in vivo.

Like fibroblasts that lack only CD-MPR, fibroblasts that lack only CI-MPR have
a partial impairment in sorting. Fibroblasts from embryos that lack both
receptors show a massive missorting of multiple lysosomal enzymes. Thus, both
receptors are required for efficient intracellular targeting of lysosomal
enzymes. Comparison of lysosomal enzymes secreted by the different cell types
indicates that the two receptors may interact preferentially with different
subgroups of enzymes. Thus, the structural heterogeneity of the M6P
recognition marker within a single lysosomal enzyme and between different
enzymes is one explanation for the evolution of two MPRs with complementary
binding properties: that is, to provide an efficient but varied targeting of
lysosomal proteins in different cell types or tissues. In the final analysis,
what initially appeared to be a precise lock-and-key mechanism turns out to be
a far more complex and flexible system, with functionally useful biological
flexibility.

At steady state, MPRs are concentrated in the TGN and late endosomes, but they
cycle constitutively between these organelles, early (sorting) endosomes,
recycling endosomes, and the plasma membrane ([Figure
33.5](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f5/?report=objectonly)). MPRs avoid
delivery to lysosomes, in which they would be degraded. This trafficking is
governed by a number of short amino acid sorting signals in the cytoplasmic
tails of the receptors. The TGN is the site where newly synthesized lysosomal
enzymes bind to MPRs that are then collected into clathrin-coated pits and
packaged into clathrin-coated vesicles for delivery to the early endosome.
This process involves interaction of the MPRs with two types of coat proteins:
the GGAs (Golgi-localized, γ-ear–containing, ADP-ribosylation factor binding)
and AP1 (adapter protein 1). In addition to binding MPRs, the coat proteins
recruit clathrin for the assembly of clathrin-coated vesicles. Following
delivery to early endosomes, lysosomal enzymes are released from MPRs as the
endosomes mature to late endosomes and the pH decreases. Late endosomes then
undergo dynamic fusion/fission with lysosomes, allowing selective transfer of
lysosomal enzymes to the lysosomes and leaving the MPRs behind in subdomains
of the late endosomes. These MPRs may then either return to the TGN or move to
the plasma membrane, in which internalization via clathrin-coated pits occurs,
mediated by the coat protein AP2. There are several pathways for the MPRs to
be returned to the TGN from the various endosomal compartments, although the
relative importance of the different pathways is unclear.

The original experiments of Neufeld showed that a portion of newly synthesized
lysosomal enzyme molecules are secreted into the medium, but may be recaptured
by the same cell or by adjacent cells expressing cell-surface CI-MPRs ([Figure
33.1](/books/NBK453066/figure/ch33.f1/?report=objectonly)). Enzyme molecules
that bind to such cell-surface MPRs are endocytosed via clathrin-coated pits
and vesicles, eventually reaching the same late endosomal compartments in
which newly synthesized molecules arrive from the Golgi. This
secretion–recapture pathway is a minor one in most cells, but plays a critical
role in enzyme replacement therapy.

As described in [Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/), there are many genetic
disorders in glycan degradation that result from decreased activity of a given
lysosomal enzyme. Some of these enzymes that are targeted to lysosomes via the
M6P pathway have been prepared in large quantities as recombinant soluble
proteins and used in enzyme replacement therapy. To date, the benefits have
been variable but less than optimal. There are a number of potential reasons
for this. First, some of the preparations may not contain the physiologic
complement of the phosphomannosyl recognition marker. It is reasonable to
suggest that a greater M6P content may improve the efficacy of enzyme
replacement in these patients. This has been shown to be the case in mouse and
dog model systems. However, even with fully phosphorylated enzymes there may
be obstacles that are difficult to overcome. For example, some cell types in
the body may not express adequate levels of the CI-MPR on their surfaces to
endocytose sufficient enzyme to restore normal lysosomal function. Also, the
organ that is most seriously affected in many of these diseases (the brain) is
inaccessible because of the blood–brain barrier. This is an area where further
studies are needed.

Although the MPR pathway has a major role in vertebrate lysosomal enzyme
trafficking, its contribution in invertebrate systems is not prominent.
Lysosomal enzymes are targeted in organisms such as _Saccharomyces_ ,
_Trypanosoma_ , and _Dictyostelium_ , without the aid of identifiable MPRs.
The slime mold _Dictyostelium discoideum_ produces a novel
methylphosphomannose structure on some of its lysosomal enzymes that can be
recognized in vitro by the mammalian CI-MPR (not the CD-MPR). However, despite
the presence of a GlcNAc-P-T that recognizes α1-2-linked mannose residues, the
enzyme does not specifically recognize lysosomal enzymes, and no receptor for
M6P has been found in this organism. The protozoan _Acanthamoeba_ produces a
GlcNAc-P-T that specifically recognizes lysosomal enzymes. However, this
organism lacks a gene that could encode an “uncovering” enzyme, and so would
not be expected to form M6P available to an MPR. Although some additional
“lower” organisms do show evidence for an uncovering enzyme, no MPR activity
has yet been found. The evolutionary divergence point at which the complete
MPR system became established remains to be defined.

Although originally discovered as a receptor for lysosomal enzyme trafficking,
the CI-MPR turns out to be a remarkably multifunctional molecule. It binds
IGF-II with high affinity even though this polypeptide lacks M6P residues.
Many studies have explored potential interactions between these two disparate
ligands. Although these two ligands bind to distinct sites on the CI-MPR
receptor, there are conflicting reports regarding synergistic or antagonistic
interactions between the two activities. Regardless, it appears that the CI-
MPR acts primarily as a general sink for excess IGF-II in the extracellular
fluid, carrying it to the lysosome for degradation, and reducing the amount
available to bind to the IGF-I receptor. Several reports indicate that binding
of IGF-II to the CI-MPR regulates motility and growth in some cell types. It
has also been found that the CI-MPR binds retinoic acid with high affinity at
a site that is distinct from those for M6P and IGF-II. This binding of
retinoic acid seems to enhance the primary functions of the CI-MPR receptor,
and the biological consequence appears to be the suppression of cell
proliferation and/or induction of apoptosis. The significance of this
unexpected observation is still being explored. Other ligands include
urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and plasminogen.

There are also some unexplained changes in CI-MPR expression in relation to
malignancy. Loss of heterozygosity at the CI-MPR locus occurs in dysplastic
liver lesions and in hepatocellular carcinomas associated with the high-risk
factors of hepatitis virus infection and liver cirrhosis. Mutations in the
remaining allele were detected in ∼50% of these tumors, which also seem to
frequently develop from clonal expansions of phenotypically normal, CI-MPR-
mutated hepatocytes. Thus, the CI-MPR fulfills many of the classic criteria to
be classified as a liver “tumor-suppressor” gene.

Interestingly, M6P-containing N-glycans have been found on a variety of
nonlysosomal proteins. Some are hydrolytic enzymes that seem to have taken on
a predominantly secretory route, for example, uteroferrin and DNase I. In the
first case, the failure of removal of the blocking _N_ -acetylglucosamine
residues may be the cause for secretion. With DNase I, the native level of
phosphorylation simply appears to be low. M6P has been found on the
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) precursor and the phosphate is lost from
the mature form. It appears that M6P may serve to target the precursor to CI-
MPR for activation. Other nonlysosomal proteins reported to carry M6P include
proliferin, CREG (cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes), LIF (leukemia
inhibitory factor), and thyroglobulin. In the last case, M6P-containing
N-glycans are suggested as a mechanism to target the protein for degradation
and release of thyroid hormones. But one should not necessarily assume that
M6P-containing N-glycans on all of these proteins are involved in
intracellular trafficking. Just as phosphorylation of serine residues has
diverse biological roles, M6P might be used for more than one purpose in a
complex multicellular organism.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) and Varicella zoster virus (VZV) glycoproteins have
also been shown to carry N-glycans with M6P. In these cases, M6P is on complex
N-glycans, suggesting that it originates from a distinct biosynthetic pathway.
Regardless of its mode of synthesis, interaction of cell-free VZV with CI-MPR
at the cell surface is required for viral entry into endosomes. Interestingly,
intracellular CI-MPR can also divert newly synthesized enveloped VZV to late
endosomes in which the virions are inactivated before exocytosis. This is
suggested as the mechanism by which this successful parasite limits immediate
excessive spread and avoids killing the host or possibly, a form of host
defense. Biopsies of VZV-infected human skin showed that CI-MPR expression is
lost in maturing superficial epidermal cells, preventing diversion of VZV to
endosomes and allowing constitutive secretion of infectious VZV. These data
implicate CI-MPR in the complex biology of VZV infection.

Although the M6P recognition marker has a crucial role in trafficking newly
synthesized lysosomal enzymes to vertebrate lysosomes, alternate mechanisms
exist in some cell types. In patients with I-cell disease some cells and
tissues, such as the liver and circulating granulocytes, have essentially
normal levels of enzymes. B-lymphoblast lines derived from these patients also
do not show the complete phenotype of enzyme deficiency seen in fibroblasts.
One possible explanation is that the M6P pathway for trafficking of lysosomal
enzymes is a specialized form of targeting, superimposed on some other basic
mechanisms that more primitive organisms use, some of which remain undefined.
In this regard, two lysosomal enzymes, acid phosphatase and
β-glucocerebrosidase, are not at all affected in their distribution in I-cell
disease fibroblasts. With acid phosphatase, the enzyme is synthesized
initially as a membrane-bound protein, and once in the lysosome, it is
proteolytically cleaved to generate the mature soluble form.
Glucocerebrosidase is targeted to lysosomes independently of the MPR pathway
by forming a complex with LIMP-2, a lysosomal membrane protein that contains a
targeting signal in its cytoplasmic tail. Likewise, other integral membrane
proteins of the lysosome use similar targeting motifs in their cytoplasmic
tails to traffic to the lysosome.

A number of proteins have now been identified as [P-type
lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ptypelectins/) because of the presence
of MRH domains. These MRH domains contain the residues that bind mannose, but
lack the residues that bind phosphate. In several instances, the proteins have
been shown to bind to oligomannosyl structures. Most of these proteins reside
in the ER where they function as lectins in the ER quality control pathway.
Interestingly, the γ-subunit of GlcNAc-P-T has an MRH domain that plays a
critical role in the phosphorylation of a subset of lysosomal enzymes. The
precise biologic role of these MRH domains remains to be elucidated.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Sally Riewe Boyd,
Sumit Rai, and Patience Sanderson.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.034

C-type lectins (CTLs) are Ca++-dependent glycan-binding proteins (GBPs) that
share primary and secondary structural homology in their carbohydrate-
recognition domains (CRDs). The [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) of CTLs is more generally defined as
the CTL domain (CTLD), because not all proteins with this domain bind either
glycans or Ca++. CTLs include collectins, selectins, endocytic receptors, and
proteoglycans, some of which are secreted and others are transmembrane
proteins. They often oligomerize, which increases their avidity for
multivalent ligands. CTLs differ significantly in the types of glycans that
they recognize with high affinity. These proteins function as adhesion and
signaling receptors in many pathways, including homeostasis and innate
immunity, and are crucial in inflammatory responses and leukocyte and platelet
trafficking.

The CTL family is remarkably diverse and is the largest family of known
glycan-binding proteins (GBPs). The first CTL identified in animals was the
hepatic asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR), also termed the hepatic
Gal/GalNAc receptor or Ashwell–Morell receptor (AMR). The sequences of the AMR
and other CTLs revealed a [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) unique to this family of proteins.
[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) binding by CTLs is typically
Ca++-dependent because of specific amino acid residues that coordinate Ca++
and bind the hydroxyl groups of sugars, but some CTLDs bind glycans without
coordinating Ca++. The CTLD is defined by the sequence of amino acids and Cys
positions, as well as the folded structure. Interestingly, comparisons of the
folded structure of the CTLD to that in other proteins revealed a common
folded structure, termed the CTL fold (CTLF), which is a structurally rigid
scaffold that comprises a remarkable number of sequence variations, yet may
have no sequence in common with CTLs, such as the major tropism determinant
(Mtd), which is a receptor-binding protein of _Bordetella_ bacteriophage. The
evolutionarily ancient CTLF may occur in at least 1013 different sequences, a
diversity that rivals the immunoglobulin fold in its conservation of structure
using millions of different primary amino acid sequences.

The [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) of
CTLs is a compact region of 110–130 amino acid residues with a double-looped,
two-stranded antiparallel β-sheet formed by the amino- and carboxy-terminal
residues connected by two α-helices and a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet
([Figure 34.1](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f1/?report=objectonly)). The CRD
has two conserved disulfide bonds and up to four sites for binding Ca++, with
site occupancy depending on the lectin. Amino acid residues with carbonyl side
chains are often coordinated to Ca++ in the CRD, and these residues directly
bind to sugars when Ca++ is bound in site 2. A ternary complex may form
between a sugar, the Ca++ ion in site 2, and amino acids within the CRD,
whereas the specific residues within the CRD determine sugar specificity. Key
conserved residues that bind sugars include the “EPN” motif (which promotes
binding to Man, GlcNAc, Fuc, and Glc) and “WND” motif (which promotes binding
to Gal and GalNAc), as seen in mouse L-selectin and rat mannose-binding
protein C ([Figure 34.1](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f1/?report=objectonly)).
However, because the CTLD is relatively shallow with few contacts to sugars,
it is not possible to predict the glycan structures that bind to a particular
CTL. In several CTLs, such as P-selectin and the AMR, Ca++ binding induces
structural changes in the CRD that stabilize the double loop region. Loss of
Ca++ can lead to destabilization of these loops and loss of ligand binding,
even when Ca++ is not directly involved in complexing the ligand, as seen in
the macrophage mannose receptor. This destabilization is also important in pH-
induced changes that lead to loss of ligand-binding affinity, because of the
pH-induced loss of Ca++. In CTLD-containing proteins such as human
tetranectin, which is not known to bind glycans, the CTLD can bind Ca++, but
in the absence of Ca++ the CTLD is important for interactions with kringle-
domain-containing proteins, such as plasminogen.

CTLs occur as both monomers and oligomers, such as the trimeric rat mannose-
binding protein (MBP)-A ([Figure
34.2](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f2/?report=objectonly)). The rat MBP was
the first CTL structurally characterized with ligand by crystallography. The
[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) of
trimeric lectins is angled to the side of the stalk domain through which the
protein associates to form the trimer. The CRDs are at the top of the trimer
and enhance multivalent interactions with glycan ligands.

CTLDs have been categorized into 16 groups that are distinguished by their
domain architecture. Many more than 100 different proteins encoded in the
human genome contain a CTLD ([Figure
34.3](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f3/?report=objectonly)). Most of these
groups have a single CTLD, but the macrophage mannose receptor (group 6) is an
example of a multi-CTLD protein and has eight of these domains. Several groups
have CTLDs that lack critical Ca++ residues, but can bind glycans (e.g.,
dectin-1 and layilin in group 5); the REG group 7 lacks Ca++ binding but it is
unclear whether they bind glycans, whereas tetranectin in group 9 binds Ca++
and again it is unclear if it binds glycans. From a functional perspective, we
know most about collectins, endocytic receptors, myeloid lectins, and
selectins, as discussed below.

CTLF-containing proteins are found in all metazoans and many nonmetazoans.
This latter group includes bacterial toxins (e.g., pertussis toxin), outer-
membrane adhesion proteins (e.g., invasin from _Yersinia pseudotuberculosis_
), and viral proteins (e.g., envelope protein in Epstein–Barr virus).
Interestingly, the viral proteins have more similarity to mammalian CTLD-
containing proteins than the bacterial proteins. There are at least 278 genes
encoding CTLDs within the genome of _Caenorhabditis elegans_ , but only a
small number have the key amino acid residues required to form the primary
Ca++ binding site.

The AMR is expressed primarily on the sinusoidal surface of hepatocytes and
was discovered serendipitously during studies on clearance of the serum
glycoprotein ceruloplasmin, a major copper carrier in mammalian plasma.
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) of ceruloplasmin
was found to regulate its lifetime in the rabbit circulation; enzymatic
desialylation of radiolabeled ceruloplasmin exposed penultimate β-linked Gal
residues and caused rapid accumulation of asialoceruloplasmin into
hepatocytes. Removal or modification of the exposed Gal residues lessened the
rate of clearance. In 1974, the Ca++-dependent AMR was purified from rabbit
liver by affinity chromatography on asialoorosomucoid-Sepharose. The rabbit
AMR is a heterooligomer containing two subunits of 48 kDa and 40 kDa, whereas
the human AMR contains two subunits of 50 kDa (H1) and 46 kDa (H2) that occur
as a heterooligomeric type I transmembrane protein (trimers and high-order
oligomers) comprised of small and large subunits.

The purified rabbit AMR agglutinated desialylated human and rabbit
erythrocytes and induced mitogenesis in desialylated peripheral lymphocytes,
which represented the first demonstration that an animal GBP could profoundly
affect cellular metabolism. Interestingly, hepatic AMR can also recognize some
sialylated ligands (Siaα2-6Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R). A homologous GBP identified in
chicken hepatocytes recognizes glycoproteins containing terminal GlcNAc,
rather than Gal, residues. Interestingly, circulating glycoproteins in birds
constitutively lack sialic acid (Sia) compared with their mammalian
counterparts.

The AMR was one of the first proteins shown to participate in receptor-
mediated endocytosis (RME) and, along with the low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
receptor, transferrin receptor, and mannose-6-phosphate receptor (M6PR),
represent some of the best characterized receptors. The AMR internalizes its
ligands captured at the cell surface at physiological pH; via coated pits, the
AMR in complex with its ligand is internalized into coated vesicles ([Figure
34.4](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f4/?report=objectonly)), and changes in pH
in late endosomes lead to dissociation of Ca++ from the AMR and release of
ligand. The uncomplexed AMR then recycles to the plasma membrane, whereas the
ligand is delivered to lysosomes where it is degraded. For some nonrecycling
receptors (e.g., dendritic cell [DC]-specific intercellular adhesion
molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin [DC-SIGN]), both the ligand and receptor are
targeted to lysosomes and degraded. Internalization of ligands by the AMR in
hepatocytes is rapid, occurring in 2–3 minutes, and the receptor recycles to
the surface within 4–5 minutes. The efficiency of the AMR in endocytosis has
led it to be a target for gene therapy and delivery of molecules to
hepatocytes.

The precise orientation of the trimers within the AMR can dictate its affinity
to specific glycans that have multivalent presentations. The AMR binds glycans
with terminal β-linked Gal or GalNAc residues; however, tri- and tetra-
antennary N-glycans, with appropriate branching and presentation of
nonreducing terminal Gal/GalNAc, bind to the rat AMR with >100,000 × higher
affinity (∼nM range) than ligands with a single terminal Gal/GalNAc residue.

Surprisingly, mice null for the AMR were found to be phenotypically normal
without challenge. However, it is now known that the AMR is required to clear
platelets (thrombocytes) during _Streptococcus pneumonia_ –related sepsis,
which is accompanied by microbial-dependent desialylation of platelets and
consequent thrombocytopenia. Clearance helps to limit disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC) caused by the infection. Such clearance of
platelets during sepsis or as a result of platelet aging is also linked to
production of thrombopoietin that regulates platelet production.

Many other CTLs, both type I and type II transmembrane proteins, also deliver
bound ligands to lysosomes via RME through their cytoplasmic motifs ([Figure
34.4](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f4/?report=objectonly)). Endocytosis of
ligands by CTLs in DCs and macrophages can lead to receptor accumulation and
degradation in phagolysosomes or to recycling of the receptor to the cell
surface. The pathway taken is dependent on the bound ligand. Dectin-1 is
degraded when it internalizes zymosan, but it is recycled when it endocytoses
soluble ligands. Stimulation of CTLs such as dectin-1 in myeloid cells
activates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factor-κB (NF-
κB), and enhances transcription of genes important in innate immune responses.
Internalization of antigens via the CTLs in DCs induces production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and other responses.

Clustering and density of the CTLDs may determine both their specificity and
affinity for ligands because each individual [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) can act independently to bind sugar.
Although the hepatic lectins subunits have a single CTLD, the macrophage
mannose receptor has eight CTLDs in a single polypeptide. The adjacent CTLDs
may promote binding to specific multivalent, mannose-containing glycans. The
macrophage mannose receptor internalizes lysosomal enzymes containing
oligomannose-type N-glycans and facilitates phagocytosis of several pathogens
such as yeast, _Pneumocystis carinii_ , and _Leishmania_. Interestingly,
domains in some CTLs outside of the CTLD may also have receptor activity. For
example, the cysteine-rich domain of the mannose receptor is an R-type domain
([Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)) that binds to glycans containing
R-GalNAc-4-SO4 on pituitary glycoprotein hormones and thus acts to clear these
hormones from the circulation.

The collectins are a family of soluble and membrane-bound CTLs that contain a
collagen-like domain amino-terminal to the CTLD and usually assemble in large
oligomeric complexes containing 9–27 subunits ([Figure
34.3](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f3/?report=objectonly)). Bovine conglutinin
was identified in the early 1900s by Bordet and Streng as a plasma protein
that agglutinated erythrocytes following reactions with antibody and
complement, now known to be through Ca++-dependent interactions with the
exposed glycans on iC3b after proteolytic conversion from C3b. Bovine
conglutinin and human conglutinin bind yeast glycans, and GlcNAc can inhibit
interactions. The term conglutinin was coined in 1993 based on evidence that
conglutinin had a collagen-like sequence and exhibited lectin activity. To
date, nine different collectins have been identified: conglutinin, mannose-
binding lectin (MBL), surfactant proteins SP-A and SP-D (which were originally
found in the lung but also expressed in the intestine), and collectins CL-43,
CL-46, CL-P1, CL-L1, and CL-K1. MBL, conglutinin, CL-43, CL-46, CL-K1, SP-A,
and SP-D are soluble, whereas CL-L1 and CL-P1 are membrane proteins.

Collectins are pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) functioning in innate
immunity that bind to surfaces of microbes or fungi expressing glycan ligands
termed pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Thus, collectins and
many other CTLs in myeloid cells, as discussed above, function as PRRs and
cooperate with Toll-like receptors (TLRs) in recognition and responses of
cells to pathogens. Examples of PAMPS include lipopolysaccharides (LPSs),
β-glucans, lipoteichoic acids (LTAs), and glycoproteins of parasites.
Collectins stimulate in vitro phagocytosis by recognizing PAMPS, and binding
promotes leukocyte chemotaxis and stimulates the production of cytokines and
ROS by immune cells. Lung surfactant lipids have the ability to suppress a
number of immune cell functions such as proliferation, and this suppression of
the immune response is further augmented by SP-A.

Binding of MBL and other collectins initiates the lectin pathway of complement
activation. Such collectins are associated with proenzyme forms of MBL-
associated serine proteases 1 and 2 (MASP-1 and -2), in which binding to
ligand by the [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) activates MASP-1 to cleave MASP-2,
which then activates complement via the classical pathway and generates
opsonic C3b fragments that coat pathogens and lead to their destruction and
phagocytosis. Some individuals with MBL deficiency syndrome have mutations in
the Gly-X-Y repeat encoded within exon-1 of the MBL gene ( _MBL2_ ). Mutations
within exon-1, which are highly variable among human populations, inhibit
assembly of the MBL subunit, leading to increased risk of microbial
infections. Furthermore, several polymorphisms within the promoter region of
MBL2 are associated with MBL deficiency and enhanced susceptibility to
infections. Genetic variants of _MBL2_ are also associated with Crohn's
disease. In addition, polymorphisms in _MASP1_ and _MASP2_ are associated with
altered serum levels and compromised activity of collectins. Activation of
these proteases can also lead to prothrombin cleavage and promote clot
formation.

Myeloid cells, which include monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and DCs,
have a large number of proteins with CTLDs, which belong mainly to groups 2,
5, and 6 (see [Figure
34.3](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f3/?report=objectonly)). Myeloid cells also
express many members of the galectin and Siglec families of lectins. All
leukocytes express L-selectin (group 4), which is discussed below in a
separate section on selectins. Group 2 CTLs are DC-SIGN (in humans, but there
is no murine homolog), CD209a (also termed SIGN-R1 in mice, but there is no
human homolog), macrophage CTL (MCL), dectin-2 (DC-associated C-type
lectin-2), langerin, the macrophage galactose-binding lectin (MGL), and the
macrophage inducible Ca++-dependent lectin (MINCLE) (CLEC4E); in group 5,
dectin-1, myeloid-DAP12-associating lectin (MDL-1), CLEC-1, CLEC-2, and
dendritic cell–associated lectin-1 (DCAL-1); and in group 6, macrophage
mannose receptor and DEC-205.

There are approximately 20 members of the natural killer (NK) cell receptor
group 5 of CTLD-containing proteins in humans, and additional ones in mice.
Many of the genes encoding the NK cell receptor group 5 are present on human
chromosome 12 and mouse chromosome 6. The dectin-1 cluster that is part of the
NK gene complex of CTLDs (mouse chromosome 6 and human chromosome 12) includes
dectin-1, CLEC-1, CLEC-2, LOX-1, CLEC12b, and CLEC9a. These CTLDs bind various
ligands. The dectin-2 cluster of CTLDs (whose genes are clustered in the
centromeric region of the NK gene cluster) includes dectin-2, blood DC antigen
2 (BDCA-2), DC immunoactivating receptor (DCAR), DC immunoreceptor (DCIR), CTL
superfamily 8 (CLECSF8), and MINCLE (CLEC4E). Mice have the Ly49 family of
receptors that contain CTLDs and are on murine chromosome 6. But the Ly49
members, also termed Ly49 NK cell receptors, may not bind sugar but primarily
bind to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I ligands and MHC class
I-like molecules expressed by viruses. These are most functionally related to
the killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) in human NK cells and
some T cells.

The myeloid CTLDs act as PRRs and collectively can recognize a wide variety of
glycans acting as PAMPs, as well as nonglycan determinants. The glycan ligands
for the myeloid CTLs are diverse. MINCLE, which was identified originally as a
protein that recognizes dying cells, binds α-mannose-containing glycans and
especially interacts with mannans and trehalose dimycolate, a key glycolipid
virulence factor from _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ and _Mycobacterium bovis_.
hBDCA-1 binds HIV-1 gp120 and galactose-containing glycans. Dectin-1, which
binds ligands in the absence of Ca++, and dectin-2, which binds Ca++, are
important in fungal defense, and mice deficient in either one are more
susceptible to specific yeast and fungal infections. Dectin-1 is the
functional receptor for β-glucans, which are polymers of a backbone of
β1-3-linked glucose and side chains of β1-6-linked glucose. Dectin-2 binds
α-mannans, which are polymers of α1-6-linked mannose with α1-2-linked mannose
side chains. However, the ligands of many myeloid proteins with CTLDs are not
well understood, including myeloid inhibitory CTL-like receptor (MICL) and
DNGR-1. There is some evidence that DNGR-1 binds damage-associated molecular
patterns (DAMPs) exposed in dying cells (DNGR-1 binds F-actin). Thus, the
CTLDs in such proteins may not be involved in glycan binding.

The various signaling pathways by which many of these myeloid CTLDs function
is illustrated in [Figure
34.5](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f5/?report=objectonly). Most of these
proteins express immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) motifs
in their cytoplasmic domain. An example is dectin-1, which contains an
activating ITAM-like motif, and like other activatory ITAM CTLs, also contains
a tri-acidic motif that promotes downstream signaling. Some CTLs in myeloid
cells, such as MICL and macrophage antigen h (MAH), contain an immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory (ITIM) motif. Such motifs on phosphorylation recruit
tyrosine phosphatases to negatively regulate signaling pathways.

Among the myeloid CTLDs, CLEC-2 is unusual in that it may not be involved
directly in innate immunity; it is expressed by NK cells, DCs, megakaryocytes,
and platelets, but it is also expressed on some tumor cells. CLEC-2 is a type
II transmembrane glycoprotein whose signaling is initiated by tyrosine
phosphorylation of a single tyrosine in the YXXL motif of its cytoplasmic
domain. Signaling involves Src, Syk kinases, and phospholipase Cγ2. CLEC-2 is
also a receptor for the platelet activating snake toxin rhodocytin, from the
Malayan viper, _Calloselasma rhodostoma_.

The major endogenous glycoprotein ligand for CLEC-2 is podoplanin (also called
Aggrus), expressed by lymphatic endothelial cells and lymph node fibroblastic
reticular cells (FRCs). CLEC-2 binds to the sialylated O-glycans and peptide
portions of podoplanin. This is physiologically important and serves both as
an alternative pathway for in vivo platelet activation, as well as
fundamentally serving to drive lymphangiogenesis through the signaling
functions of podoplanin. In the absence of extended O-glycans on podoplanin,
as engineered in mice lacking C1GalT1 (T-synthase), due to loss of T-synthase
or its chaperone Cosmc (C1GalT1C1), podoplanin is dysfunctional. This leads to
defects in lymphangiogenesis, due to lack of platelet involvement, a phenotype
that closely phenocopies that seen in podoplanin-deficient mice.

Another potential adhesion molecule is prolectin (CLEC17A), which is expressed
in dividing B cells in germinal centers, and interacts with glycans containing
terminal α-linked mannose or fucose residues. It may function within lymph
nodes as an adhesion or colonization factor for invading tumor cells and shows
preference for binding to epithelial rather than mesenchymal cells, which is
relevant for tumor cells undergoing epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT).

Both macrophages and DCs are antigen-presenting cells (APCs) that internalize
antigens via specific endocytic receptors or by fluid-phase pinocytosis; they
process antigens for presentation to CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. DCs also
contribute to the balance between tolerance and the induction of immunity and
help to distinguish harmless “self-antigens” from pathogens. When DCs are
activated, they migrate to lymph nodes where they interact with T cells. The
types of antigens that DCs encounter lead to their differentiation into
different subtypes, which function to instruct the differentiation of T cells.
TLRs and CTLs (for myeloid cells, these have also been termed CTL receptors or
CLRs) act to help DCs discriminate between pathogens and self-antigens. TLRs
are PRRs that interact with PAMPs, but, unlike CLRs, TLRs cannot directly
promote phagocytosis of bound ligands. Ligation of TLRs can lead to DC
maturation in a pathogen-specific manner. In contrast, DC interaction with
pathogens through CLRs, in the absence of TLR activation, leads to
internalization and processing of antigens and can result in DCs remaining
immature. Interactions of T cells with antigens presented by immature DCs may
lead to tolerogenic, rather than inflammatory, responses. However, if both
TLRs and CLRs are activated and “cross-talk” ensues, DCs mature in different
ways. For example, mycobacteria interact with DCs via TLR-2 and TLR-4,
resulting in strong T-helper 1 (Th1) responses by the activated DCs. However,
some virulent strains of mycobacteria secrete glycosylated factors (e.g.,
ManLAM) that are bound by CLRs, but apparently not by TLRs, which lead to
down-regulation of TLR activation and limitation of DC maturation.

A seminal experiment in the 1960s by Gesner and Ginburg showed that
32P-labeled rat lymphocytes injected back into rats homed to the spleen and
lymph nodes, but when they were first treated with crude glycosidases homing
was diminished. They hypothesized that “… sugars serve a physiological
function by acting as sites of cellular interactions … .” This exceptional
insight eventually led to the discovery of L-selectin and its role in
lymphocyte homing.

There are three members of the selectin family, P-, E-, and L-selectin, and
they are among the best-characterized family of CTLs because of their
extensively documented roles as cell adhesion molecules. They mediate (1) the
earliest stages of leukocyte trafficking; (2) constitutive migration of
lymphocytes to peripheral lymph nodes and to skin; and (3) hematopoietic stem
cell trafficking to marrow. The three mammalian selectins are type-1
transmembrane glycoproteins that are expressed on platelets, endothelial
cells, and leukocytes, hence the origin of their names ([Figure
34.6A](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly)). Interactions
between the selectins and cell-surface glycoconjugate ligands promote
tethering and rolling of leukocytes and platelets in postcapillary venules,
and are important for leukocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation and
injury. Rolling is a form of adhesion that requires rapid formation and
dissociation of bonds between selectins and their ligands. Rolling adhesion
enables leukocytes to encounter endothelium-bound chemokines. Signaling
through chemokine receptors cooperates with signaling through selectin ligands
to activate leukocyte integrins, which bind to immunoglobulin superfamily
ligands on endothelial cells to slow rolling velocities and arrest leukocytes
on vascular surfaces. The arrested leukocytes then crawl across between
endothelial cells into the underlying tissues (diapedesis or extravasation)
([Figure 34.6D](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly)).

Each selectin has a C-type [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) at the amino terminus followed by a
consensus epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain and a number of short
consensus repeats composed of sushi domains (also called complement control
protein [CCP] modules) ([Figure
34.6A](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly)). The proteins have
a single transmembrane domain (TM) and a cytoplasmic domain and are relatively
rigid, extended molecules. The CRD of each selectin has modest affinity for
the sialylated, fucosylated structure known as the sialyl Lewis x antigen
(SLex) and its isomer sialyl Lewis a (SLea) ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)) and increased binding to some sulfated versions of
these motifs. In addition, P- and L-selectin, but not E-selectin, also bind to
some forms of heparin/heparan sulfate (HS) in a divalent cation-dependent
manner. However, each of the selectins binds with higher affinity to specific
macromolecular ligands, and most contain sialylated, fucosylated O-glycans.
The major ligand for P-selectin, termed P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1
(PSGL-1), has sulfated tyrosine residues adjacent to SLex expressed on a
core-2-based O-glycan. This glycoform of PSGL-1 can also bind to L- and
E-selectin. Another major ligand for E-selectin is a glycoform of CD44 called
“hematopoietic cell E/L-selectin ligand” (HCELL) constitutively expressed on
human hematopoietic stem cells that carries SLex on its N-glycans. Murine
leukocytes require core 1-derived O-glycans on CD44 and other glycoproteins to
bind E-selectin. Ligands for L-selectin on endothelial cells of lymph node
high endothelial venule (HEV) contain 6-sulfo-SLex determinants containing
MECA-79 antigen on mucin-type O-glycans and on N-glycans.

P-selectin (CD62P) was discovered as an antigen expressed on the surface of
activated platelets. It is constitutively expressed in megakaryocytes, where
it is packaged into the membranes of α-granules of circulating platelets. It
is also expressed in the Weibel–Palade bodies of vascular endothelial cells.
Within minutes following activation of either platelets or endothelial cells
by proinflammatory secretagogues such as histamine, thrombin, or complement
components, P-selectin is expressed on the cell surface because of fusion of
the intracellular storage membranes with the plasma membrane. Sequences within
the cytoplasmic domain of P-selectin mediate its sorting to secretory granules
as well as its rapid endocytosis from the plasma membrane and movement from
endosomes to lysosomes, where it is degraded. Splice variants of human
P-selectin transcripts yield forms of P-selectin that lack a TM, thus
contributing to low-level soluble forms of P-selectin in the circulation.
Leukocyte adhesion also stimulates proteolytic cleavage of the ectodomain of
P-selectin from the plasma membrane, releasing it into the circulation. The
inflammatory mediators tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin 1-β (IL1-β),
and LPS augment transcription of mRNA for P-selectin in endothelial cells in
mice and non-primate mammals but not in humans.

P-selectin contributes to leukocyte recruitment in both acute and chronic
inflammation. Mice that lack P-selectin exhibit defective rolling of their
leukocytes on endothelial cells of postcapillary venules, diminished
recruitment of neutrophils or monocytes into tissues following injection of
inflammatory mediators, and impaired recruitment of T cells into skin or other
tissues following challenge with specific antigens. Mobilization of P-selectin
to the surfaces of activated endothelial cells is important for all these
responses. In addition, P-selectin expressed on the surfaces of activated
platelets contributes to inflammation as well as to hemostasis and thrombosis.
Activated platelets adhere through P-selectin to neutrophils, monocytes, NK
cells, and some subsets of T lymphocytes. This adhesion augments the
recruitment of leukocytes and platelets to sites of vascular injury.
Expression of P-selectin on both platelets and endothelial cells contributes
to experimental atherosclerosis in mice. Platelet-expressed P-selectin also
stimulates monocytes to synthesize tissue factor, a key cofactor of blood
coagulation that facilitates fibrin deposition during clot formation.

As discussed below, although the major leukocyte counter receptor for
P-selectin is PSGL-1, P-selectin (and L-selectin) also binds less avidly to
some forms of heparin/HS and to some other glycoproteins that express SLex.
Athough the physiological significance of this non-PSGL-1-dependent binding by
P-selectin is unclear, clinically prescribed levels of heparin can block
P-selectin functions. In addition, P-selectin can interact with mucins
containing highly clustered O-glycans bearing SLex antigens and sulfate
esters, which appear to be important in the metastasis of tumors bearing such
ligands ([Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). The therapeutic effect of
heparin in blocking cancer metastases may thus be mediated at least partly
through blocking P- and/or L-selectin-dependent adhesion of leukocytes and
platelets to tumor cells expressing SLex/a rich sulfated mucins. Results from
a phase 2 trial suggest that a chemical selectin inhibitor (GMI-1070) may
reduce the severity of vasoocclusive crisis in patients with sickle cell
disease (SCD). Complementary phase 2 trials results using blockade of
P-selectin in humans with an inhibitory humanized antibody, has also shown
efficacy in prophylactic treatment of SCD.

PSGL-1 (CD162) is a homodimeric, disulfide-bonded mucin with subunits of ∼120
kDa. It is the major physiological ligand on leukocytes for P- and L-selectin
and is also an important ligand for E-selectin ([Figure
34.6B](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly)). PSGL-1 contains
16 decapeptide repeating units (mucin repeats) with the consensus sequence
spanning residues 118–277 in the ectodomain of the long form of the protein,
which is the major form expressed in humans. Murine PSGL-1 has some sequence
similarity to the human sequence, but the mouse protein has only 10 decameric
repeats with the consensus sequence -E-T-S-Q/K-P-A-P-T/M-E-A-, which is
different from human PSGL-1. The highest homology between human and murine
PSGL-1 occurs in the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains, and unexpectedly
not in the P-selectin-binding domain.

The PSGL-1 polypeptide is expressed in most leukocytes (including neutrophils,
monocytes, eosinophils, basophils, and subsets of T cells), and also on
hematopoietic stem cells of mice and humans. Additionally, PSGL-1 is expressed
in some activated endothelial cells, most notably the inflamed microvessels of
the ileum in a spontaneous model of chronic ileitis in mice. In leukocytes,
PSGL-1 is enriched in microvilli and is associated with lipid rafts.

In neutrophils, monocytes, and activated T cells, PSGL-1 undergoes the
appropriate posttranslational modifications to express the SLex structure on
core 2 O-glycans ([Figure
34.6C](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly)). This glycoform of
PSGL-1 interacts with each of the three selectins to support leukocyte rolling
under flow. Engagement of PSGL-1 during rolling also transduces signals into
leukocytes that activate leukocyte integrins to slow rolling velocities.
Signaling through PSGL-1 cooperates with signaling through chemokine receptors
to elicit other effector responses in leukocytes.

PSGL-1 has multiple functions in addition to being a selectin ligand. PSGL-1
is a check-point regulator in T cells, promotes T-cell exhaustion, and partly
regulates the programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) expression. PSGL-1 via
its sulfated tyrosine residues can interact with certain chemokines, including
CCL21 and CCL19, which may promote T-cell entry into secondary lymphoid
organs. PSGL-1 is an adhesion molecule for pathogens, including enterovirus
71, _Anaplasma phagocytophilum_ (the tick-transmitted obligate intracellular
bacterium that causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis), and _S. pneumonia_. In
some cases, as for _A. phagocytophilum_ , the SLex-containing O-glycan of
PSGL-1 is a recognition factor, whereas for the other pathogens, sulfated
tyrosines are recognized.

The key determinants for binding P-selectin are in the extreme amino terminus
of PSGL-1. Antibodies to this region block binding of PSGL-1 to P- and
L-selectin (but not to E-selectin, which may interact with other fucosylated
sites on PSGL-1 and does not interact with sulfated tyrosines). Treatment of
neutrophils with selective proteases that remove the first ten amino acids
from the amino terminus of PSGL-1 abrogates its binding to P- and L-selectin.
Site-directed mutagenesis of a specific O-glycosylated amino-terminal
threonine and/or the three tyrosine residues in the amino terminus of PSGL-1
prevents binding to P- and L-selectin. Finally, a synthetic glycosulfopeptide
(GSP) with the structure shown in [Figure
34.6C](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly) binds to P-selectin
with similar high affinity as that of native PSGL-1.

The data support the model in [Figure
34.6B](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly) in which the
combination of tyrosine sulfate residues and a glycan on PSGL-1 are required
for high-affinity binding to P-selectin. The cocrystal structure of a
PSGL-1-derived GSP with P-selectin confirms this model. The interactions
between the GSP and P-selectin result from a combination of hydrophobic and
electrostatic contacts. These include contacts of at least two of the three
tyrosine sulfate residues as well as other PSGL-1 amino acids with multiple
residues within the P-selectin [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/), and hydroxyl groups in the fucose
residue of SLex that ligate the lectin domain-bound Ca++, and there are
additional binding interactions with the hydroxyl groups of galactose and the
–COOH group of Neu5Ac.

E-selectin (CD62E) was discovered as a leukocyte adhesion molecule expressed
by activated vascular endothelial cells. In most tissues (the bone marrow and
skin are exceptions), endothelial cells do not constitutively express
E-selectin. Cytokine-dependent transcriptional processes lead to an inducible
expression of E-selectin on the surface of the endothelium. Inducible
transcription of the E-selectin locus by TNF-α, IL1-β, and LPS is mediated at
least in part through NF-κB-dependent events. In vitro, cytokine treatment
increases E-selectin expression after 2 hours, with maximal expression at 4
hours. E-selectin expression then declines to basal levels within 12–24 hours
in vitro, but may be expressed chronically at sites of inflammation in vivo.
Decline of E-selectin expression is associated with decreased transcription of
the E-selectin locus, degradation of E-selectin transcripts, and
internalization and turnover of E-selectin protein. Acute and chronic
inflammatory conditions associated with E-selectin expression include trauma,
sepsis, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and organ transplantation.

E-selectin cooperates with P- and L-selectin to recruit leukocytes to sites of
inflammation. Physiological ligands for E-selectin contain the SLex antigen
and occur on leukocytes (neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils, memory/effector
T cells, and NK cells) and on human hematopoietic stem cells. Each of the
leukocyte subsets is found in acute and chronic inflammatory sites in
association with the expression of E-selectin. PSGL-1 is one of the
physiological ligands for E-selectin, but E-selectin can also interact with
several other glycoproteins that express the SLex antigen on either N- or
O-glycans, including HCELL (a human CD44 glycoform), E-selectin ligand-1 (in
mice), and L-selectin (in humans), and possibly long-chain glycosphingolipids
expressing the SLex antigen. In human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), via
adhesive interactions on bone medullary microvessels that constitutively
express E-selectin, HCELL directs trafficking of HSCs into marrow. In addition
to effects on leukocyte and hematopoietic stem cell migration, E-selectin
receptor/ligand interactions may have a potential role in cancer metastasis
(see [Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)).

L-selectin (CD62L) is expressed on the microvilli of most leukocytes,
including all myeloid cells, naïve T and B cells, and some memory/effector T
cells. L-selectin was the first selectin discovered through efforts to define
molecules that facilitate recirculation of lymphoid cells from the
intravascular compartment to secondary lymphoid organs, including lymph nodes
and Peyer's patches, from which the lymphoid cells then return to the
circulation through the lymphatic system, as discussed above in work by Gesner
and Ginsburg. This recirculation process provides lymphocytes with the
opportunity to encounter foreign antigens displayed by APCs within secondary
lymphoid organs. Early studies indicated that blood lymphocytes enter lymph
nodes in specialized postcapillary HEVs. Endothelial cells in the HEV are
cuboid in shape. Their surfaces are decorated with mucins that mediate
L-selectin-dependent adhesion of lymphocytes. These mucins are called
peripheral node addressins. They include CD34, Sgp200, GlyCAM-1, MAdCAM-1,
endoglycan, endomucin, and podocalyxin-like protein (PCLP). L-selectin is
proteolytically shed from the surface of activated leukocytes by a
metalloproteinase TNF-α-converting enzyme (TACE).

Rolling mediated by L-selectin exhibits a counterintuitive “shear threshold”
requirement (e.g., a minimum flow rate is required for leukocytes to roll). As
the flow rate drops below this threshold, leukocytes roll faster and more
unstably and then detach. Flow-enhanced rolling operates through a force-
dependent mechanism. As the flow rate increases, the force applied to adhesive
bonds between L-selectin and its ligands increases. At threshold levels, the
force actually strengthens the bonds, which prolongs their lifetimes. These
are called “catch bonds.” As the flow rate increases further, the applied
force begins to weaken the bonds, which shortens their lifetimes. These are
called “slip bonds.” Catch bonds are regulated by force-dependent
straightening of the angle between the lectin and EGF domains of L-selectin,
which affects how ligand dissociates from the binding interface on the lectin
domain. Transitions between catch and slip bonds are also seen for
interactions of P-selectin and E-selectin with their ligands. However, these
transitions occur at lower forces with less dramatic effects in the
circulation.

A unique feature of the L-selectin ligands on HEV is the requirement for
sulfated glycans, such as 6-sulfo-SLex on both core-2 O-glycans and on
extended core-1 O-glycans. The 6-sulfo-SLex determinant is associated with the
MECA-79 epitope on O-glycans ([Figure
34.6](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly)), an antibody that
binds to 6-sulfo-[ _N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) on extended core-1 O-glycans. The biosynthesis of
the 6-sulfo-SLex determinant depends on two key α1-3 fucosyltransferases, FuT-
VII and FuT-IV, along with at least four different sulfotransferases that may
form the 6-sulfo-SLex determinant. Two of these sulfotransferases, GlcNAc6ST-1
and GlcNAc6ST-2, are expressed in HEV and appear to be most important. Mice
lacking FuT-VII or both FuT-VII and FuT-IV have dramatically reduced homing of
lymphocytes to lymph nodes. Mice lacking both GlcNAc6ST-1 and GlcNAc6ST-2 do
not express 6-sulfo-SLex or the MECA-79 epitope and exhibit markedly
diminished lymphocyte homing to lymph nodes. A unique β1-3GlcNAcT generates
the extended core-1 O-glycan; mice lacking both this β1-3GlcNAcT and the
β1-6GlcNAcT branching enzyme for core-2 O-glycan biosynthesis do not express
the MECA-79 antigen, but they have residual lymphocyte rolling on HEV and only
a minimal decrease in lymphocyte numbers in peripheral and mesenteric lymph
nodes. The residual L-selectin-dependent lymphocyte homing appears to result
from 6-sulfo-SLex on N-glycans, suggesting that both N- and O-glycans on HEV
glycoproteins contribute to L-selectin-dependent lymphocyte recirculation
through lymph nodes.

L-selectin also plays a role in adhesion of neutrophils, eosinophils, and
monocytes to nonlymphoid vascular endothelium (see [Figure
34.6](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f6/?report=objectonly)). The major ligand
for L-selectin in these inflammatory settings is PSGL-1, which is expressed on
adherent leukocytes and may also be deposited on inflamed endothelial cells as
fragments left behind by previously rolling leukocytes. An alternate ligand on
endothelial cells is HS. As with P-selectin, clinically relevant doses of the
drug heparin can block L-selectin, and likely contributes to the inhibition of
tumor metastasis and of mucinous-tumor associated hypercoagulability
(Trousseau's syndrome) ([Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). On human
hematopoietic stem cells, HCELL is also a potent L-selectin ligand, yet unlike
all other naturally-expressed L-selectin ligands, its binding to L-selectin is
not sulfate-dependent. Mice lacking L-selectin have defects in neutrophil
recruitment in the context of inflammation as well as defects in homing of
naïve lymphocytes to secondary lymphoid organs.

The CTLD occurs in several proteoglycans (lecticans or hyalectins) that lack
TMs and reside in the extracellular matrix (ECM) (group I; see [Figure
34.3](/books/NBK453028/figure/ch34.f3/?report=objectonly)). These include
aggregan, brevican, versican, and neurocan. Like the selectins, each of these
core proteins contains a CTLD, an EGF-like domain, and a CCP domain, but their
domain order is different and they are located in the carboxyl terminus of the
protein. A large region containing attachment sites for chondroitin sulfate
(CS) and keratan sulfate (KS) is proximal to the lectin domain. A more
complete discussion of the proteoglycans is provided in [Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/). The exact functions of the CTLD in these proteins
are still unknown. The CTLD of rat aggrecan is important for Ca++-dependent
binding to the fibronectin type II repeats 3–5 of rat tenascin-R. The CTLDs in
other lecticans are probably also responsible for protein–protein interactions
with other receptors, including tenascin-R, tenascin-C, and other tenascins,
which are ECM glycoproteins highly expressed in the nervous system.
Interestingly, the protein–protein interactions between rat fibronectin and
the CTLD of rat aggregan bear resemblance to the protein–protein interactions
seen in P-selectin binding to PSGL-1. Tenascin-R is one of the main carriers
of the unusual glycan antigen HNK-1, which was named after its identification
on human NK cells. Brevican, a lectican found in the nervous system, binds to
the HNK-1-containing glycosphingolipids. Thus, the CTLD in lecticans may
represent a versatile structural feature that can be used for both
protein–protein and protein–glycan interactions. Interestingly, several
aggrecanopathies (inherited defects in aggrecan production/function) are
associated with mutations in the exon encoding the CTLD domain of aggrecan.

A number of proteins with CTLDs have been identified in the pancreas and
kidney, but whether these proteins bind glycans is unclear. PKD1, one of two
ADPKD gene products associated with autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney
disease (ADPKD), has been implicated in cell–cell and cell–matrix
interactions. The _PKD1_ gene encodes polycystin-1 (PC1), a very large protein
(4293 amino acids) with a single CTLD near its amino terminus. Carboxy-
terminal proteolysis of PC1 during its secretion releases a cytoplasmic
portion that becomes nuclear and regulates cell signaling pathways.
Interestingly, the CTLD of PC1 appears to bind collagen in a Ca++-dependent
fashion that is inhibitable by sugars, including dextrans, but the precise
nature of the interaction is still unclear.

Some small proteins with CTLDs include Reg3α and PSP (pancreatic stone
protein), which are in the REG group 7 of CTLs, and are essentially isolated
CTLDs that are preceded by a signal sequence. Reg3α (also known as HIP/PAP) is
a secreted CTL that an amino-terminal signal sequence and a 16 kDa CTLD. Reg3α
is an anti-inflammatory protein with scavenging activity toward ROS, and can
bind peptidoglycan and directly kill Gram-positive, but not Gram-negative,
bacteria. Reg3α kills bacteria by first binding to peptidoglycan and then
binding to membrane phospholipids and forms a hexameric membrane-
permeabilizing oligomeric pore.

Lower vertebrates, invertebrates, and some viruses also contain CTLDs. The
galactose-specific lectin from _Crotalus atrox_ binds a variety of galactose-
containing glycolipids in a Ca++-dependent fashion. A number of related venom
proteins inhibit platelet function and/or the coagulation cascade.
Alboaggregin A from the white-lipped pit viper ( _Trimeresurus albolabris_ )
binds to the platelet GPIb-V-IX complex and stimulates platelet agglutination,
but the potential role of glycan recognition in this process is unclear. In
contrast, the gp42 protein of Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) has a CTLD that is NK-
receptor like, and ectodomain of the poxvirus (Poxviridae) protein A33, a
target of subunit vaccine development, has two CTLDs in dimeric form, and has
resemblance to the CTLDs of the NK lectins. But, neither of these domains in
these viral proteins binds either Ca++ or glycans, and may have evolved by
convergent evolution.

The authors acknowledge the helpful comments of Robert Sackstein.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.035

[I-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/itypelectins/) are glycan-
binding proteins (excluding antibodies and T-cell receptors) in which the
binding domain is homologous to the large and varied immunoglobulin
superfamily (IgSF) of proteins. Among I-type lectins, the Siglec family of
sialic acid–recognizing lectins is the best characterized subgroup, both
structurally and functionally, and is therefore the major focus of this
chapter. Details of these lectins' discovery, characterization, binding
properties, and biology are provided, along with discussions of their
functional roles in vertebrate biology, with most currently available
information being in mammals.

The Ig fold is made up of antiparallel β-strands organized into a β-sandwich
containing 100–120 amino acids and usually stabilized by an intersheet
disulfide bond. Three types or “sets” of Ig domains are defined based on
homologies in sequence and structure to domains of antibodies: the V-set
variable-like domain, the C1- and C2-set constant-like domains, and the I-set
domain that combines features of both V- and C-set domains.

Before the 1990s, it was thought that antibodies were the only IgSF members
capable of recognizing glycans. The first direct evidence for nonantibody IgSF
glycan-binding proteins came from independent studies on sialoadhesin (Sn), a
sialic acid (Sia)–dependent binding receptor on mouse macrophage subsets, and
on CD22, a molecule already previously cloned as a B-cell marker. A variety of
techniques showed Sn functions as a lectin, including loss of binding
following sialidase treatment of ligands, inhibition assays with sialylated
compounds, and Sia-dependent binding of the purified receptor to glycoproteins
and to red blood cells derivatized to carry Sias in different linkages. With
recombinant CD22, abrogation of cell adhesive interactions by sialidase
treatment led to the discovery that it was a Sia-binding lectin, with a high
degree of specificity for α2-6-linked Sias. Cloning of Sn then showed that it
was an IgSF member sharing homology with CD22 and with two other previously
cloned proteins, CD33 and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG). Demonstration
of Sia recognition by CD33 and MAG resulted in the definition of a new family
of Sia-binding molecules, which were initially called “sialoadhesins.”
Meanwhile, preliminary evidence for glycan binding by additional IgSF members
emerged, and a suggestion was made to classify all these molecules as “I-type”
lectins. However, it became clear that these four Sia-binding molecules were a
distinct subgroup sharing both sequence homology and Ig domain organization,
and that they were not all involved in adhesion. The term Siglec (sialic
acid–binding immunoglobulin-like lectin) was therefore proposed in 1998.
Subsequently, most of the CD33-related [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/siglecs/) (CD33rSiglecs) were discovered as a result of genomic
sequencing projects, which allowed in silico identification of novel Siglec-
related genes and cDNAs.

[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) are divided into two major
subgroups based on sequence similarity ([Figure
35.1](/books/NBK453073/figure/ch35.f1/?report=objectonly)) and on conservation
among mammalian species. The first group comprises Sn (Siglec-1), CD22
(Siglec-2), MAG (Siglec-4), and Siglec-15, for which there are clear-cut
orthologs in all mammalian species examined and which share only ∼25%–30%
sequence identity among each other. The second group comprises the
CD33rSiglecs, which share ∼50%–80% sequence similarity but appear to be
evolving rapidly and undergoing shuffling and gene conversions of Ig-domain-
encoding exons, making it difficult to define orthologs even between rodents
and primates (see below). For this reason, Siglec nomenclature uses numbers
and letters to differentiate between nonhomologous human and mouse Siglecs.

Several IgSF members other than [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/siglecs/) have been claimed to bind glycans. The best evidence is for
paired immunoglobulin-like type 2 receptors (PILR-α and PILR-β), both of which
have a single V-set domain similar to that of Siglecs with a structurally
defined sialic acid–binding site as well as a protein interaction site. PILR
proteins bind a subset of mucin-like O-glycosylated membrane proteins
involving simultaneous recognition of both the peptide backbone and sialic
acid to mediate high affinity interactions. Platelet endothelial cell adhesion
molecule (PECAM)-1 selectively recognizes α2-6-linked sialic acids and this
recognition affects endothelial biology. The neural cell adhesion molecule
(NCAM) and basigin (CD147) have been claimed to recognize and bind
oligomannose-type glycans on adjacent glycoproteins in the nervous system.
Intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 binds hyaluronan and possibly certain
mucin-type glycoproteins. Hemolin is an IgSF plasma protein from lepidopteran
insects that binds lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Gram-negative bacteria and
lipoteichoic acid from Gram-positive bacteria. Hemolin appears to have two
binding sites for LPS—one that interacts with the phosphate groups of lipid A
and another that interacts with the O-specific glycan antigen and the outer-
core glycans of LPS. There is indirect and less convincing evidence for
interactions of other IgSF molecules with glycans, such as the peripheral
myelin protein P0 with HNK-1, CD83 with Sias, and CD2 with Lewis x. Overall,
with the exception of the Siglecs and the PILRs, the direct assignment of an
IgSF fold as the actual binding pocket for glycans has not been generally
achieved. The rest of this chapter is devoted to Siglecs, the best-
characterized [I-type lectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/itypelectins/).

All [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) are type-1 membrane
proteins with a Sia-binding, amino-terminal V-set domain and varying numbers
of C2-set Ig domains that act as spacers, projecting the Sia-binding site away
from the plasma membrane. The V-set domain and the adjacent C2-set domain
contain a small number of invariant amino acid residues, including an
“essential” arginine on the F β-strand required for sialic acid binding, and
an unusual organization of cysteine residues. Instead of the typical
intersheet disulfide bond between the B and F β-strands, Siglecs display an
intrasheet disulfide bond between the B and E β-strands, permitting increased
separation between the β-sheets. The resulting exposure of hydrophobic
residues allows specific interactions with constituents of Sia ligands. All
Siglecs studied so far also appear to contain an additional unusual disulfide
bond between the V-set domain and the adjacent C2-set domain, which would be
expected to promote tight packing at the interface between the first two Ig
domains. Although the significance of this bond for ligand recognition is
unclear, optimal Sia-binding activity of many Siglecs requires the adjacent
C2-set domain, probably for correct folding and stability.

Three-dimensional structures for the mouse Sn and human Siglec-7 V-set domains
and the V-set and adjacent C2 set domain of Siglec-5 have been determined by
[X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/xraycrystallography/), in
the presence and absence of Sia ligands ([Figure
35.2](/books/NBK453073/figure/ch35.f2/?report=objectonly)). These and the
solved [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)
structure of Siglec-8 provide structural templates for Sia recognition by
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) that are likely to be shared
by other Siglecs. In all instances, an “essential” arginine residue is located
in the middle of the F β-strand, making a bidentate salt bridge with the
carboxylate of Sia. Siglecs also contain conserved hydrophobic amino acids on
the A and G β-strands that interact with the N-acetyl group and glycerol side
chain of Sia, respectively. Although all Siglecs appear to use a common
template for recognizing Sias, their binding preferences for extended glycan
chains vary greatly. The peptide loop between the C and C′ β-strands is highly
variable among Siglecs and has a key role in determining their fine sugar
specificity. For example, molecular grafting of the C–C′ loop between Siglec-7
and Siglec-9 resulted in switched sugar-binding specificities. Structural
studies have shown that this loop appears to be highly flexible, being able to
make specific and varied interactions with long glycan chains. In addition,
V-set domain sequences are the most rapidly evolving regions in these
molecules, likely explaining species differences in binding specificity.

The cell-surface glycocalyx of most vertebrate cells is richly decorated in
glycoconjugates that contain Sias ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). The
high local concentration of Sias is likely to greatly exceed the Kd value of
each Siglec, resulting in self-binding to sialoglycans on the same membrane (
_cis_ ) that can be directly functional or that can “mask” the Sia-binding
site from interacting with sialoglycans on other cells ( _trans_ ).
Consequently, the Sia-dependent binding activity of most naturally expressed
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) is strongly enhanced
following treatment of cells with sialidase to eliminate the _cis_
-interacting sialylated glycans. A notable exception is Sn, which was
discovered via its native property as a Sia-dependent cell-adhesion molecule
on macrophages. The “masked” state of most Siglecs is a dynamic equilibrium
with multiple ligands. Thus, an external probe, cell surface or pathogen
bearing high-affinity ligands or very high densities of Sia residues can
effectively compete even with the binding domains of “masked” Siglecs. In
addition, changes in expression of glycosyltransferases or sialidases of
endogenous or exogenous origin could influence masking and unmasking of
Siglecs at the cell surface, especially during immune and inflammatory
responses.

[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) show restricted patterns of
expression in unique or related cell types (see below). This is most striking
for the conserved Siglecs, Sn (macrophages), CD22 (B lymphocytes), MAG
(myelin-forming cells), and Siglec-15 (osteoclasts). This theme extends to
some of the CD33rSiglecs, most notably in humans, including Siglec-6 on
placental trophoblasts, Siglec-7 on NK (natural killer) cells, Siglec-8 on
eosinophils, and Siglec-11 on tissue macrophages, including brain microglia.
In the mouse, Siglec-H and CD33 are excellent markers of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (DCs) and blood neutrophils, respectively, and Siglec-F is a
useful marker of eosinophils and alveolar macrophages. These cell
type–restricted expression patterns are thought to reflect discrete, cell-
specific functions mediated by each of these Siglecs. However, certain key
cells of the human immune system, such as monocytes and conventional DCs,
express multiple CD33rSiglecs.

Most [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) have one or more
tyrosine-based signaling motifs in their cytoplasmic tails, or associate with
membrane adaptor proteins containing cytosolic tyrosine motifs. The most
prevalent motif is the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM)
with the consensus sequence (V/I/L)XYXX(L/V), where X is any amino acid. Up to
300 ITIM-containing membrane proteins are identified in the human genome, and
many of these are established inhibitory receptors of hematopoietic and immune
systems. Following tyrosine phosphorylation by Src family kinases, they
function by recruiting and activating SH2-domain-containing effectors,
especially the protein tyrosine phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2. These counteract
activating signals triggered by receptors containing immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based activatory motifs (ITAMs). Some Siglecs, notably Siglecs-14, -15, -16,
-H, and mCD33, have a positively charged residue within the transmembrane
region, which can associate with the DAP12 (DNAX activation protein-12) ITAM-
containing adaptor, thereby mediating activating functions.

Sn was identified as a Sia-dependent sheep erythrocyte receptor expressed by
mouse stromal macrophages from various tissues. Sn has an unusually large
number of Ig domains (seventeen) which are conserved among mammals and
reptiles. These may be important for extending the Sia-binding site away from
the plasma membrane to promote intercellular interactions. Sn prefers
α2-3-linked Sias more than α2-6- and α2-8-linked Sias and does not bind Sias
modified by hydroxylation (Neu5Gc) or side-chain O-acetylation (e.g.,
Neu5,9Ac2).

In humans and mice, Sn expression appears specific for macrophage subsets,
especially CD169+ macrophages resident in lymphoid tissues. These cells play
important roles in antigen presentation to B cells and NKT cells, tolerance of
self-reactive T cells and as Trojan horses for viral infections to permit
protective immune responses. Sn can also be strongly induced on monocytes,
macrophages, and monocyte-derived DCs in vitro by type I interferons or agents
such as viruses and Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands that induce interferon
production. Accordingly, Sn is up-regulated on circulating monocytes in human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected individuals and on macrophages in
rheumatoid arthritis, primary biliary cirrhosis and systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). Sn expression on inflammatory macrophages has been
associated with favorable prognosis in colorectal cancer and with more severe
disease in proliferative glomerulonephritis. Many of the above disease
associations may reflect exposure of macrophages to interferons rather than
being causally related. Indeed, in the BWF1 murine model of spontaneous SLE,
there was no influence of Sn deficiency on disease severity. However, in mouse
models of inherited neuropathy, autoimmune uveoretinitis and experimental
allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), Sn-deficient mice showed reduced
inflammation accompanied by reduced levels of T-cell and macrophage
activation. This appears to be due to a Sn-dependent suppression of CD4+
FoxP3+ regulatory T-cell (Treg) expansion thereby promoting inflammation. Sn
can also efficiently mediate the capture and uptake of exosomes released from
B lymphocytes following apoptosis and therefore play a role in antigen
presentation.

A role for Sn in phagocytic interactions of macrophages with various
sialylated bacteria and protozoal pathogens has also been shown, including
[_Neisseria
meningitidis_](/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Info&id=487&lvl=3&lin=f&keep=1&srchmode=1&unlock),
[_Campylobacter
jejuni_](/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Info&id=197&lvl=3&lin=f&keep=1&srchmode=1&unlock),
and [_Trypanosoma
cruzi_](/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Info&id=5693&lvl=3&lin=f&keep=1&srchmode=1&unlock).
A role in host protection was observed using an infection model with Group B
streptococcus (GBS), in which Sn-deficient mice showed increased bacterial
spread. Conversely, Sn expression on macrophages and monocyte-derived DCs can
be exploited by enveloped viruses displaying host-derived sialic acids,
leading to their capture, uptake, and dissemination. This was first seen with
the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus which targets lung
alveolar macrophages of pigs and more recently with HIV and other
retroviruses. On HIV, Sn can recognize both sialylated gp120 glycoprotein and
GM3, a monosialylated ganglioside terminating in Neu5Acα2-3Gal. GM3 is
packaged into HIV during the budding from infected cells which occurs in lipid
rafts. On monocyte-derived DCs, Sn interactions with GM3-presenting HIV lead
to membrane invaginations containing viral particles that are very efficiently
transferred to T cells in a process known as “ _trans_ infection.”

CD22 is a developmentally regulated cell-surface glycoprotein on B cells,
expressed at approximately the time of Ig gene rearrangement and lost when
mature B cells differentiate into plasma cells. CD22 has seven Ig-like domains
and the intracellular region has six tyrosine-based signaling motifs, four of
which could function as ITIMs. CD22 is a well-established negative regulator
of B-cell activation, making an important contribution toward the threshold
for signaling via the B-cell receptor (BCR) complex. Following BCR cross-
linking, CD22 is rapidly tyrosine-phosphorylated on its ITIMs by the protein
tyrosine kinase Lyn. This leads to recruitment and activation of the SHP-1
tyrosine phosphatase and subsequent inhibition of downstream signaling
mediated via the BCR. Although additional activating molecules are recruited
to the phosphorylated tyrosine motifs in CD22, the net phenotype of
CD22-deficient mice is consistent with a primary role of CD22 in negative
regulatory signaling, manifested by up-regulated MHC class II expression,
enhanced B-cell turnover, reduced numbers of recirculating B cells in the bone
marrow, reduced numbers of marginal zone B cells, and reduced anti-IgM-induced
proliferation.

Of all the [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/), CD22 has the
highest conserved specificity for sialylated ligands, binding primarily to
α2-6-linked Sias of the type Neu5Ac(Gc)α2-6Galβ1-4GlcNAc, which are common
capping structures of many N-glycans. Additional specificity can be conferred
by the nature of the Sia moiety as well as sulfation of the underlying glycan.
Neither hCD22 nor mCD22 binds 9-O-acetylated Sias; mCD22 has a strong
preference for Neu5Gc over Neu5Ac, whereas hCD22 binds both of the latter
forms. Recombinant soluble CD22 can precipitate a subset of glycoproteins from
B-cell lysates including CD45, a major sialoprotein of T and B cells. However,
on B cells, CD22 appears to mainly be either _cis_ -associated with other CD22
molecules in a glycan-dependent manner or with the BCR, which it inhibits in a
glycan-independent manner. These interactions are consistent with studies of
mouse mutants that either lack CD22 glycan ligands or express mutated forms of
CD22 unable to bind glycans. B cells from ST6Gal-I-deficient mice that lack
ligands for CD22 show an anergic phenotype, essentially the opposite of the
phenotype observed with CD22-deficient mice. Mice expressing a lectin-inactive
version of CD22 with a mutated binding site arginine also show reduced BCR
signaling (anergy) and, similar to ST6Gal1-deficient mice, they show increased
CD22-BCR association and stronger CD22 phosphorylation ([Figure
35.3](/books/NBK453073/figure/ch35.f3/?report=objectonly)). Mice deficient in
the sialic acid O-acetylesterase encoded by _Siae_ manifest increased Sia
9-O-acetylation, and reduced ligands for CD22 (and Siglec-G) resulting in a
hyperactive phenotype. Likewise, _Cmah_ null mice deficient in Neu5Gc have
reduced ligands for mouse CD22 and B cell hyperactivity.

Besides regulating B-cell functions via _cis_ -interactions, CD22 can also
mediate _trans_ -interactions with sialylated ligands on other cells that
sequester CD22 away from the BCR. This could be important for raising B-cell
activation thresholds to “self” antigens and may help to ensure that signaling
through the BCR can only occur in lymphoid tissues in which CD22
α2-6-sialylated ligands are abundant. Although CD22-deficiency alone does not
lead to extensive autoimmune reactions, mice deficient in both CD22 and the
other major B-cell Siglec, Siglec-G, develop SLE-like symptoms, including
production of IgG autoantibodies and glomerulonephritis.

The restricted expression and properties of CD22 make it an attractive
therapeutic target. A humanized antibody to CD22, Epratuzumab, drives
internalization of CD22 on human B cells and modulates their activation.
Ongoing clinical trials indicate that Epratuzumab may be useful in treatment
of SLE, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and non-Hodgkins lymphoma.

MAG, a minor constituent of central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral
nervous system (PNS) myelin, has five Ig-like domains and is well conserved
among vertebrates. It is expressed by myelin-forming cells: oligodendrocytes
in the CNS and Schwann cells in the PNS. In mature myelinated axons it is
found primarily on the innermost (periaxonal) myelin wrap, directly across
from the axon, but not in the multilayers of compacted myelin. MAG-deficient
mice develop normal myelin, but defects in myelin and axons increase as
animals age, indicating a role for MAG in the maintenance of myelinated axons,
rather than in the process of myelination. MAG-null mice display late-onset
axonal degeneration leading to progressive loss of motor function. MAG-null
mice fail to show characteristic myelin-induced increases in neurofilament
phosphorylation and therefore reduced axon diameters, indicating that MAG
signaling is required for optimal myelin–axon interactions. MAG also directly
inhibits neurite outgrowth from a wide variety of neuronal cell types in
vitro. This contributes to the inhibitory activity of myelin on axon outgrowth
after nervous system injury, hampering functional recovery.

Genetic and biochemical evidence indicate that gangliosides, sialylated
glycolipids, are important physiological ligands for MAG, mediating both
myelin–axon stability and inhibition of axon outgrowth. Recombinant forms of
MAG bind selectively to the abundant axonal gangliosides GD1a and GT1b
([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). The phenotype of MAG-deficient mice is
similar to that of mice lacking an N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (coded by
the _B4galnt1_ gene) required for synthesis of GD1a and GT1b, resulting in
progressive motor dysfunction. Notably, mutations in the same gene (human
_B4GALNT1_ ) result in hereditary spastic paraplegia, a progressive motor
neuropathy reminiscent of that of _B4galnt1_ -null mice. Binding of soluble
MAG to some types of neurons, and subsequent MAG-mediated inhibition of
neurite outgrowth, is sialic acid– and ganglioside-dependent. MAG-mediated
inhibition of neurite outgrowth from _B4galnt1_ -null mouse neurons is
diminished, whereas MAG still inhibits neurite outgrowth from the neurons of
mice lacking the “b-series” gangliosides (GD3 synthase-null; [Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)), which lack GT1b but express GD1a. These findings
suggest that gangliosides GD1a or GT1b act as functional docking sites for MAG
on neuronal cells. MAG binds to other axonal receptors including a family of
GPI-anchored proteins (Nogo receptors NgR1 and NgR2) and paired
immunoglobulin-like receptor B (PirB). Gangliosides, NgRs, and PirB may act
independently or interactively as MAG receptors, linking MAG binding to axonal
signaling in different neuronal cell types.

Siglec-15 was first described as a highly conserved ancient Siglec in
vertebrates. It lacks the typical arrangement of cysteines seen in the V-set
Ig domain of other [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) and has an
unusual intron–exon arrangement. Nevertheless, it can bind the SialylTn
structure (Neu5Acα2-6GalNAcα) and more weakly to 3′-sialyllactose. It
associates with DAP12 but also has an ITIM-like motif in the cytoplasmic tail.
Although first reported on macrophages and DCs in human lymphoid tissues,
Siglec-15 is most strongly expressed in osteoclasts and their precursors in
which it plays an important role together with receptor activator of nuclear
factor (NF)-κB ligand (RANKL) in triggering osteoclast differentiation.
Osteoclasts are key cells involved in bone degradation and share a common
hemopoietic progenitor with macrophages. Mice lacking Siglec-15 show a mild
osteoporosis and impaired osteoclast differentiation. Specific antibodies
against Siglec-15 phenocopy this state, because of antibody-induced
internalization and degradation of Siglec-15. Siglec-15 therefore provides a
novel target for diseases involving excessive osteoclast activation and bone
loss, such as menopause-related osteoporosis.

Genes encoding most of the CD33rSiglec subfamily are clustered on human
chromosome 19q13.3-13.4 or the syntenic region of mouse chromosome 7. They
include CD33 (Siglec-3), [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/)-5
through -12, Siglec-14, and Siglec-16 in humans and CD33, Siglecs-E, -F, -G,
and -H in mice. Genes encoding Siglec-11 and -16 are found a few megabases
away in some species. Similar clusters are found in other mammals. It is
difficult to assign all definitive orthologs between primates and rodents,
resulting in different nomenclatures. One reason is that most IgSF domains are
encoded by exons with phase-1 splice junctions, allowing exon shuffling
without disrupting open reading frames, resulting in hybrid genes that are
difficult to distinguish from similarly organized genes in other species. A
second reason is that the Sia-binding V-set domains of the CD33rSiglecs are
rapidly evolving, presumably to adjust their binding specificity to rapid
evolution of the endogenous host sialome, as well as evasion of binding by
pathogens via molecular mimicry ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) or
specific protein-mediated interactions (see below). There are also multiple
gene conversion events between adjacent genes and pseudogenes within this
cluster. Of interest is the finding that humans show many CD33rSiglec
differences compared with our closest evolutionary cousins (the chimpanzees),
more than the differences between mice and rats, which shared a common
ancestor much earlier (see below).

As mentioned earlier, an “essential” arginine residue in all known
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) is required for binding Sia-
containing ligands. This residue is often mutated in nature, resulting in loss
of binding ability. Examples include Siglec-12 in humans, Siglecs-5 and -14 in
the chimpanzee, gorilla, and orangutan, Siglec-6 in the baboon, and Siglec-H
in the rat. The common arginine codon (CGN, where N is any nucleotide) tends
to be highly mutable because of the CpG sequence. However, the frequency with
which such events occurs suggests that it might be a natural mechanism to
eliminate Sia binding of a given Siglec, when such activity becomes
inappropriate under changing evolutionary pressures, without causing a
complete loss of the Siglec. Overall, it appears that this class of _SIGLEC_
genes is subject to multiple “Red Queen” effects in evolution, in which
evolutionary changes of sialyltransferases in response to the emergence of
sialic acid–binding pathogens lead to subsequent evolutionary changes of
Siglec specificities ([Figure
35.4](/books/NBK453073/figure/ch35.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Below, we provide a brief summary of the main features of the human
CD33rSiglecs and, where relevant, their murine counterparts.

CD33 is a marker of early human myeloid progenitors and leukemic cells, and is
also expressed on monocytes and tissue macrophages. It has 2 Ig domains and
was the first of the CD33rSiglecs to be characterized as an inhibitory
receptor, suppressing activation of FcγRI and recruiting SHP-1 and SHP-2
([Figure 35.5](/books/NBK453073/figure/ch35.f5/?report=objectonly)). CD33 has
some preference for α2-6-rather than α2-3-sialylated glycans and binds
strongly to sialylated ligands on myeloid leukemic cell lines. The restricted
expression of CD33 has been exploited in the treatment of acute myeloid
leukemia using Gemtuzumab, a humanized anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody coupled
to the toxic antibiotic calicheamicin. Binding of anti-CD33 mAbs to CD33
triggers endocytosis of the bound antibody. This depends on ITIM
phosphorylation, recruitment of the E3 ligase Cbl, and ubiquitylation of the
CD33 cytoplasmic tail. Selective expression of CD33 on leukemic progenitor
cells also makes it an attractive target for therapy using chimeric antigen
receptors expressed on cytotoxic T cells.

Recently, two coinherited single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) have been
associated with protection of humans against late-onset Alzheimer's disease.
These SNPs result in increased exon 2 skipping, leading to raised levels of
CD33 lacking the V-set domain and reduced levels of full-length CD33. Because
full-length CD33 can inhibit microglial cell uptake of Aβ protein in a sialic
acid–dependent manner, it is thought that individuals lacking the protective
SNPs may accumulate more toxic Aβ proteins, thus driving Alzheimer's disease
pathology. Targeting CD33 using antibodies that either inhibit function or
promote internalization and degradation may be a useful approach to
Alzheimer's disease.

The murine ortholog of CD33 exists as two spliced forms that differ in the
cytoplasmic region, neither containing the typical ITIM found in most other
CD33rSiglecs. Furthermore, mCD33 has a lysine residue in the transmembrane
sequence and may therefore couple to the DAP12 transmembrane adaptor, as shown
for mouse Siglec-H and human [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/siglecs/)-14, -15, and -16. In contrast to hCD33, mCD33 in the blood is
expressed mainly on neutrophils rather than monocytes, which also suggests a
nonconserved function of this receptor.

The _SIGLEC5_ and _SIGLEC14_ genes are adjacent to each other on chromosome 19
and encode proteins containing four and three Ig-like domains respectively.
Because of ongoing gene conversions within most taxa, the first two Ig domains
of Siglec-5 and Siglec-14 share >99% sequence identity but then diverge, with
Siglec-5 being an inhibitory receptor with typical ITIMs, whereas Siglec-14
can complex with DAP12 and activate signaling. Both Siglec-5 and Siglec-14
bind similar ligands, with some preference for the sialylTn structure
(Neu5Acα2-6GalNAcα). Although many antibodies to Siglec-5 cross-react with
Siglec-14, specific antibodies revealed that although Siglec-5 is expressed on
neutrophils and B cells, Siglec-14 is found on neutrophils and monocytes. A
_SIGLEC14_ null allele is frequently present in Asian populations and is less
common in Europeans. The null allele arose from a recombination event between
the 5′ region of the _SIGLEC14_ gene and the nearby 3′ region of the _SIGLEC5_
gene, resulting in a fusion protein almost identical to Siglec-5 but expressed
in a Siglec-14-like manner. Individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) who are also _SIGLEC14_ null showed reduced exacerbation
attacks compared with individuals expressing Siglec-14. Both Siglec-5 and
Siglec-14 can bind sialylated strains of [_Haemophilus
influenzae_](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Info&id=727&lvl=3&lin=f&keep=1&srchmode=1&unlock)
implicated in COPD exacerbations and trigger inhibition and activation
responses respectively. Thus, the absence of Siglec-14 on neutrophils would
lead to reduced inflammatory responses in _SIGLEC14_ null individuals with the
added impact of Siglec-5 on monocytes. Besides expression on leukocytes, both
Siglec-5 and Siglec-14 are found on human amniotic epithelium and may mediate
dualistic responses to GBS infection and the frequency of preterm births in
infected mothers. There are no obvious equivalents of Siglec-5 or Siglec-14 in
mice making it difficult to study this interesting pair of receptors in vivo.

Siglec-6 was cloned from a human placental cDNA library and also during a
screen for proteins that bind leptin, a hormone that regulates body weight. It
has three Ig-like domains and the typical arrangement of ITIM and ITIM-like
motifs in its cytoplasmic tail. Low levels of Siglec-6 are expressed on B
cells, but high expression is seen in placental cytotrophoblastic and
syncytiotrophoblastic cells. Siglec-6 levels are increased in preterm
deliveries associated with preeclampsia, but it is not known if there is a
causal relationship. The heavily sialylated protein glycodelin is produced in
the uterus and appears to bind Siglec-6 on cytotrophoblasts and suppress their
migration into decidua through inhibition of ERK and c-Jun signaling. Siglec-6
does not have an obvious ortholog in mice, but one is present in the
chimpanzee and baboon. However, placental expression appears unique to humans.

Siglec-7 and Siglec-9 share a high degree of sequence similarity, and appear
to have evolved by gene duplication from an ancestral gene encoding a 3-Ig-
domain inhibitory siglec, represented in mice by Siglec-E. Siglec-7 is the
major Siglec on human NK cells and is also seen at lower levels on monocytes,
macrophages, DCs, and minor subsets of CD8 T cells. Siglec-7 has also been
detected in platelets, basophils and mast cells where it may modulate survival
and activation. Siglec-9 is prominently expressed on neutrophils, monocytes,
macrophages, and DCs, ∼30% of NK cells, and minor subsets of CD4 and CD8 T
cells. Based on glycan array binding ([Chapter 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)),
Siglec-7 binds strongly to α2-8-linked Sias present in “b-series” gangliosides
([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) and some glycoproteins, whereas Siglec-9
prefers α2-3-linked Sias. Sulfation of the SLex structure can strongly
influence recognition by both [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/siglecs/), with Siglec-9 preferring, 6-sulfo-SLex, and Siglec-7 binding
well to both 6-sulfo-SLex and 6′-sulfo-SLex.

Siglec-E in mice shows a combination of some features of Siglec-7 and
Siglec-9, being mainly expressed on neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages,
with Sia binding preferences that span those of both Siglec-7 and Siglec-9.
Similar to T cells, NK cells in mice appear to lack expression of inhibitory
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/). Siglec-E is an important
inhibitory receptor of neutrophils, as shown in multiple models such as LPS-
induced lung inflammation in which Siglec-E-deficient mice showed exaggerated
CD11b-dependent neutrophil influx.

Tumor cells often up-regulate cell surface sialylated glycans and it appears
that these may be important in Siglec-dependent dampening of antitumor
immunity. [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/)-7 and -9 can both
suppress NK cell cytotoxicity against tumor cells expressing relevant glycan
ligands. Siglec-9 and Siglec-E can also dampen neutrophil activation and tumor
cell killing, whereas ligation of Siglec-9 or Siglec-E on macrophages by
tumor-associated glycans seems to suppress formation of tumor promoting M2
macrophages. Overall Siglec effects on tumor cell biology may be dualistic,
depending on the stage of tumor cell growth.

Studies with GBS have also shown that sialylated bacteria can subvert innate
immune responses by targeting Siglec-9 and Siglec-E on neutrophils and
macrophages, resulting in attenuation of phagocytosis, killing, and
proinflammatory cytokine production. It has also been shown that myeloid
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) such as Siglec-9 and Siglec-E
can modulate TLR signaling in response to pathogen ligands, leading to reduced
secretion of proinflammatory mediators like TNF and increased production of
antiinflammatory cytokine, IL-10.

Siglec-8 has 3 Ig domains and is expressed on eosinophils and mast cells, with
weaker expression on basophils. It binds strongly to 6′-sulfo-SLex and to
high-molecular-weight glycans isolated from bronchial tissues. In mast cells,
Siglec-8 ligation (with antibody) inhibits FcɛR1-triggered degranulation
responses in line with its role as an inhibitory receptor. In eosinophils,
Siglec-8 triggers apoptosis, which can occur following cross-linking with
anti-Siglec-8 antibodies or sialoglycan polymers. Apoptosis depends on
generation of reactive oxygen species and caspase activation and is
paradoxically enhanced in the presence of cytokine “survival” factors such as
interleukin-5 (IL-5).

Although there is no ortholog of Siglec-8 in mice, the four-Ig domain mouse
Siglec-F is expressed in a similar way to Siglec-8 on eosinophils and has a
similar glycan-binding preference for to 6′-sulfo-SLex. It appears to have
acquired similar functions through convergent evolution. There are some
important differences, however. Siglec-F can recognize a broader range of
α2-3-linked Sias, it is also expressed on alveolar macrophages and triggers
weaker apoptosis using different signaling pathways.

Siglec-F-null mice show exaggerated eosinophilic responses in a lung allergy
model, suggesting that its normal role is to dampen such responses.
Interestingly, Siglec-F ligands in the airways and lung parenchyma were also
up-regulated during allergic inflammation.

Siglec-10 has five Ig-like domains and in addition to the ITIM and ITIM-like
motifs, displays an additional tyrosine-based motif in its cytoplasmic tail.
It is expressed at relatively low levels on several cells of the immune
system, including B cells, monocytes and eosinophils. It can also be strongly
up-regulated on tumor-infiltrating NK cells in hepatocellular carcinoma in
which its expression was negatively associated with patient survival. It is
the only CD33-related human Siglec that has a clear-cut ortholog in mice,
designated Siglec-G. Both Siglec-10 and Siglec-G prefer Neu5Gc more than
Neu5Ac in both α2-3 and α2-6 linkages. Similar to Siglec-10, Siglec-G is
mainly expressed on B-cells subsets, DCs, and weakly on eosinophils. Mice
deficient in Siglec-G show a 10-fold increase in numbers of a specialized
subset of B lymphocytes, the B1a cells that make natural antibodies. These
Siglec-G deficient B1a cells also show exaggerated Ca-fluxing following BCR
cross-linking. Studies using “knockin” mice carrying an inactivating mutation
in the sialic acid–binding site of Siglec-G show a similar phenotype. This
appears to be due to a requirement of sialic acid–dependent _cis_
-interactions between Siglec-G and the BCR. On DCs, Siglec-G has been proposed
to regulate cytokine responses to damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs)
released by necrotic cells in sterile inflammation. This is thought to be due
to a dampening effect of _cis_ -interactions between Siglec-G and the heavily
sialylated DAMP receptor, CD24. Disruption of this interaction through
sialidases released by bacteria such as [_Streptococcus
pneumoniae_](/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Info&id=1313&lvl=3&lin=f&keep=1&srchmode=1&unlock)
may be important in triggering inflammatory responses in sepsis.

Siglec-11 and Siglec-16 are paired inhibitory and activating receptors, with
five and four Ig domains respectively. In most humans, the _SIGLEC16_ gene has
a 4-base-pair deletion and only ∼35% of humans express one or two functional
alleles. The extracellular regions of these proteins are >99% identical
because of gene conversion events. Siglec-11 binds weakly to α2-8-linked Sias
in vitro. It appears to be absent from circulating leukocytes, but is
expressed widely on populations of tissue macrophages, including resident
microglia in the brain, where high levels of α2-8-linked Sias are present on
gangliosides. Expression of Siglec-11 on microglia can impair their
phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and neurotoxicity. Interestingly, microglial
expression appears unique to humans. Siglec-16 is also present on macrophages,
including microglia. These paired receptors exhibit dualistic responses to _E.
coli_ K1, which expresses polysialic acid ligands.

The ancestral condition of some hominid [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/siglecs/) (e.g., Siglec-11) appears to have been preferential binding to
Neu5Gc, a Sia specifically lost in human evolution ∼2–3 million years ago
([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). This loss could have resulted in some
Siglec unmasking, possibly leading to a state of heightened innate immune
reactivity. Some human Siglecs have undergone an adjustment to allow increased
Neu5Ac binding, and the question arises whether the adjustment is yet
complete. Possibly, as a consequence of Neu5Gc loss, several Siglecs seem to
have undergone human-specific changes in comparison to our great ape
evolutionary cousins. For example, Sn is expressed on most human macrophages,
whereas only subsets of chimpanzee macrophages are positive. This may be
related to the fact that Sn has a strong binding preference for Neu5Ac rather
than Neu5Gc. Human Siglec-5 and Siglec-14 appear to have undergone a
restoration of the “essential” arginine residue needed for Sia recognition,
which is mutated in chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans. The gene encoding
Siglec-11 has undergone a human-specific gene conversion, resulting in a new
protein with altered binding properties and new expression in brain microglia.
Siglec-12 has suffered a human-specific inactivation of the essential arginine
residue with subsequent permanent pseudogenization by a frameshift in some
humans. Siglec-13 underwent a human-specific gene deletion and Siglec-17 has a
frameshift, events possibly occurring close to the time of the common ancestor
of modern humans. Expression patterns of some Siglecs have also undergone
changes, with placental expression of Siglec-6 and amniotic epithelium
expression of Siglec-5/14 being human-specific, and a general suppression of
all CD33rSiglecs on human T cells compared with the chimpanzee. The functional
implications of these human-specific changes in Siglec biology for physiology
and disease are under exploration, and may be related to human propensities
for certain diseases ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

Although CD33rSiglecs can modulate innate immune cells responses via
recognition of endogenous sialoglycans as “self-associated molecular patterns”
(SAMPs), many pathogens take advantage of this property by generating
sialylated molecular mimics on their surfaces, using a variety of biochemical
mechanisms. The naturally occurring “essential arginine” mutations mentioned
appear to be one way that the host can evade this subversion. However,
pathogens in turn have instead evolved mechanisms to directly engage
CD33rSiglecs via protein–protein interactions—for example, the β-protein of
Type-Ia GBS engages human Siglec-5 and Siglec-14 independent of sialic acids.
Early evidence indicates that more such examples exist, as well as alternate
endogenous nonsialylated ligands within the host, such as the heat-shock
protein HSP-70, and another self-glycan, hyaluronan. As with many other
classes of receptors whose original discovery was based on one canonical
function, it is likely that evolutionary forces have generated many other
functions for [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/), independent of
their ability to recognize sialoglycans.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Steve M.
Fernandes, Heinz Läubli, Yuko Naito-Matsui, and Oliver Pearce.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.036

[Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/) are among the most widely
expressed class of lectins in all organisms. They typically bind β-galactose-
containing glycoconjugates and share primary structural homology in their
carbohydrate-recognition domains (CRDs). Galectins have many biological
functions, including roles in development, regulation of immune cell
activities, and microbial recognition as part of the innate immune system.
This chapter describes the diversity of the galectin family and presents an
overview of what is known about their biosynthesis, secretion, and biological
roles.

Following the discovery of the Ashwell–Morell asialoglycoprotein receptor in
the liver, many investigators sought other such receptors by affinity
chromatography with immobilized asialoglycoproteins. In 1975, a novel lectin
of ∼15 kDa was isolated from electric organs of the electric eel, and named
“electrolectin.” This noncovalently linked homodimer displayed
hemagglutinating activity toward trypsinized rabbit erythrocytes that was
inhibitable by β-galactosides; inclusion of β-mercaptoethanol in the isolation
buffers was required to maintain the binding activity. Soon thereafter, in
1976, similar β-galactoside-binding lectins were isolated from chicken muscle
and from extracts of calf heart and lung (∼15 kDa; now designated as
galectin-1). These proteins were initially referred to as S-type lectins to
denote their sulfhydryl dependency, presence of free cysteine residues, and
solubility, along with shared primary sequence. Interestingly, and unlike most
galectins, electrolectin does not contain free Cys residues, but a key Trp in
the binding site of its [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) can be oxidized, causing loss of
activity. In the early 1980s, a 35 kDa protein termed CBP35 that also bound to
β-galactosides was identified in mouse fibroblasts. The same protein was
studied by other groups under the names IgE-binding protein, L-29, and L-31
and is currently known as galectin-3.

The nomenclature for galectins was systematized in 1994 and the first galectin
type found (∼15 kDa, discussed above) was renamed galectin-1. All other
members of this family were numbered consecutively by order of discovery.
Multiple distinct galectins are usually expressed in a single species (up to
15 in the mouse). A list of the vertebrate galectins is shown in [Figure
36.1A](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f1/?report=objectonly).

In 1982, a shared amino acid sequence motif was identified in the
[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) of all
galectins. The canonical CRD of galectins has ∼130 amino acids, although only
a small number of residues within the CRD directly contact glycan ligands. A
comparison of more than 100 galectin sequences from many different sources
reveals that eight residues, which have been shown to be involved in glycan
binding by X-ray crystallographic analyses, are mostly invariant. In addition,
another dozen residues appear to be highly conserved. Part of the conserved
galectin sequence motif is shown in [Figure
36.1b](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f1/?report=objectonly), along with a
comparison of several human galectins.

Based on their [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) number and organization, galectins
have been classified into three major groups, termed prototypical galectins
(galectin-1, -2, -7, -10, -11, -13, -14, and -15) that contain a single CRD
that may associate as homodimers, chimera-type galectins (galectin-3), which
are characterized by having a single CRD and an amino-terminal polypeptide
“tail” rich in proline, glycine, and tyrosine residues, through which it can
form oligmers, and tandem-repeat galectins (galectin-4, -8, -9, and -12, which
comprise proteins that carry two CRDs connected by a peptide linker that can
range from five to >50 amino acids in length. Galectin transcripts may be
differentially spliced to generate multiple isoforms. Invertebrates have
galectins with one, two, or four tandemly arrayed CRDs.

Some galectins appear to be species specific, such as galectin-5 (prototype)
and galectin-6 (tandem repeat) that are found in rodents but not humans, and
galectin-11 (ovagal11; prototype) that has only been reported in sheep, and
galectin-15 has only been found in sheep and goat. The amino-terminal domain
of galectin-12 has significant homologies with other galectins, whereas the
carboxy-terminal domain displays greater divergence from other galectins.

Several proteins with sequence homology with galectins, which do not bind
typical β-galactosides, have been described as galectin-related proteins
(GRPs). For example, galectin-10, also known as the Charcot–Leyden crystal
protein, is highly abundant and is present in eosinophil granules and
preferentially binds to β-mannosides. Several GRPs, including GRIFIN
(galectin-related interfiber protein), PP-13, and PPL-13 that lack glycan-
binding activity, are related to galectin-10. It is noteworthy that the GRIFIN
homolog in the zebrafish ( _Danio rerio_ DrGRIFIN) is a functional
β-galactoside-binding protein and, like its mammalian counterpart, is also
highly expressed in the eye lens.

Hallmarks of the galectin family are the extensive taxonomic distribution of
its members, together with the evolutionary conservation of their primary
structures, gene organization, and structure of the
[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/). The
early emergence and structural conservation of the galectin family in
eukaryotic evolution is revealed in the fungus _Coprinopsis cinerea_ in the
sponge _Geodia cydonium_ , and in a protein that displays the galectin fold in
the protozoan parasite _Toxoplasma gondii_. Galectin-like sequences have also
been identified in plants ( _Arabidopsis thaliana_ ) and some viruses that
infect pigs and fish, such as the porcine adenovirus and lymphocystis disease
virus. However, galectin-like proteins or sequence motifs in the latter should
be interpreted with caution as it could result from horizontal gene transfer.

The evolution of the galectin family has been inferred from the rigorous
analysis of primary structures, gene organization, and taxonomic distribution
of family members identified in a variety of organisms, including fungi,
invertebrates, and vertebrates. Among the arthropods and nematodes, galectins
are abundantly present in _Drosophila melanogaster_ (six candidate genes) and
_Caenorhabditis elegans_ (26 candidate genes), respectively. At least 14 of
these candidate galectin genes in _C. elegans_ produce transcripts encoding
proteins. Generally, the primary structures and domain organizations of
galectins from invertebrates do not fit the canonical features of vertebrate
galectins described above ([Figure
36.1C](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f1/?report=objectonly)).

[Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/) are ubiquitous in
vertebrates. In fish, galectins have been identified and characterized in
numerous species. The zebrafish ( _D. rerio_ ) genome has ortholog genes for
all three galectin types (proto-, chimera-, and tandem-repeat) identified in
mammals. Among amphibians, several galectin subtypes have been found in
various tissues, mucus, and eggs from salamanders (the axolotl _Ambystoma
mexicanum_ ), toads ( _Bufo arenarum_ ), and frogs ( _Rana catesbeiana_ and
_Xenopus laevis_ ).

The evolution of galectins along the vertebrate taxa leading to the mammals
has been rationalized as the duplication of an early
single-[CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)
galectin gene that would have led to a bi-CRD galectin gene, in which the
amino- and carboxy-terminal CRDs subsequently diverged into two different
subtypes, defined by an exon–intron structure (F4-CRD and F3-CRD) (F refers to
the β-sandwich strand structure discussed below). All vertebrate single-CRD
galectins belong to either the F3- (e.g., galectin-1, -2, -3, -5) or F4-
(e.g., galectin-7, -10, -13, -14) subtype, whereas the mammalian tandem-repeat
galectins such as galectin-4, -6, -8, -9, and -12 contain both F4 and F3
subtypes. However, how the multiple CRD galectins from invertebrates relate to
the vertebrate tandem-repeat galectins remains to be fully understood, but a
preliminary phylogenetic analysis of the oyster galectin CvGal1 revealed that
the individual CRDs cluster with the mammalian single-CRD galectins rather
than with the tandem-repeat galectins, suggesting that the CvGal1 gene is the
product of two consecutive gene duplications of a single-CRD galectin gene
ancestral to the early invertebrate taxa that was conserved along the chordate
lineages. The striking structural and evolutionary conservation of the CRD
architecture and arrangements supports the key roles of galectins in essential
biological functions related to β-galactoside recognition.

The crystal structures of several galectins in complexes with glycan ligands
are known, including galectins-1, -2, and -7, the carboxy-terminal domain of
galectin-3, and individual domains of galectin-4, -8, and -9. In all cases,
the galectin [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) is comprised of five- and six-stranded
antiparallel β sheets arranged in a β-sandwich or jelly-roll configuration
that lacks an α-helix ([Figure
36.2A](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f2/?report=objectonly)). In the dimeric
proteins, such as galectin-1, -2, and -7, the subunits are related by a
twofold rotational axis perpendicular to the plane of the β sheets. The
glycan-binding sites in the CRD are located at opposite ends of the dimer,
although the orientation of the subunits in the galectin-7 dimer is different
from the other canonical galectin dimers. The compactly arranged structure of
the CRD partly explains the protease resistance of the galectin CRD and the
high degree of conservation and requirement for the 130 amino acids in the
CRD.

The galectin-1 [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) displays highly specific interactions
with Gal and GlcNAc residues in typical glycans. Interactions with glycans are
generally through hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions, and van der
Waals interactions through ring stacking with Gal and the highly conserved Trp
residue ([Figures
36.2B](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f2/?report=objectonly),C). In general, the
open-ended structure of the glycan-binding site is predicted to allow access
to extended Gal-containing glycans, such as the poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamines
and blood group–related structures ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)).

The binding preference of invertebrate galectins for blood group glycans can
be illustrated by a unique structural feature of the binding site of the _C.
elegans_ and oyster galectins. They show a significantly shorter loop 4 that
accommodates the 2´-fucosyl moiety that is a common feature of both the A and
B blood groups ([Figures
36.3A](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f3/?report=objectonly),B). The
α(1-3)-linked GalNAc or Gal moieties of the A and B blood group
tetrasaccharides, respectively, are recognized by the -NH at position 5 of the
conserved Trp, and a hydrophobic pocket at the external side of the β3-strand
(amino acids 30–38) recognizes the methyl of the -NAc group in α(1-3)GalNAc of
the A1/2 antigens.

There are several known and predicted subsites on galectins near the
carbohydrate-binding site that could serve to enhance affinity for more
extended glycans. Some of these subsites have been identified by cocrystal
structural analysis with glycans and by glycan-binding studies. The crystal
structure of bovine galectin-1 was derived in a complex with a biantennary
N-glycan containing two terminal β-Gal residues. The N-glycan is bridged
between two galectin-1 dimers, thus effectively creating a crystal
latticework. This type of crystal latticework may be unique among vertebrate
galectins and may be critical for their signaling and adhesive functions
([Figures 36.4](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f4/?report=objectonly) and
[36.5](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f5/?report=objectonly)).

The interactions of galectins with glycans are complex and several factors
contribute to high-affinity binding, including their natural multivalency and
oligomeric state, as well as the multivalency of their natural ligands.
Although most galectins bind weakly to simple β-galactosides, such as
disaccharides or trisaccharides (Kd in the high micromolar to low millimolar
range), they typically bind much stronger to natural glycoconjugate ligands
(apparent Kd in the submicromolar range). Studies utilizing large libraries of
glycans reveal that each galectin [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/) recognizes different glycan ligands
and shows highest affinity binding to different structures. For example,
galectin-3 binds tightly to glycans with repeating [-3Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ-]n or
poly-[ _N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) sequences containing 3-4 repeating units, regardless
of the presence of terminal β-Gal residue, and binding is further enhanced if
the penultimate β-Gal residues are substituted with Galα1-3, GalNAcα1-3, or
Fucα1-2 residues. In contrast, human galectin-1 binds well only to glycans
with terminal β-Gal residues, and does not bind blood group antigens.
Galectin-8 has two CRDs within its single polypeptide and the two CRDs bind
different glycans. For example, the amino-terminal CRD of human galectin-8
binds α2-3-sialylated glycans with high affinity (Kd ∼ 50 nm), whereas the
carboxy-terminal CRD binds to the blood group A determinant on a LacNAc core,
and does not bind sialylated glycans.

Cocrystallization of galectins with simple β-Gal-containing disaccharides has
revealed that many galectins have H-bonds to the C4 and C6 hydroxyl of Gal and
the C3 hydroxyl of GlcNAc ([Figure
36.3](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f3/?report=objectonly)). The binding sites
of galectins may be viewed as containing several subsites: one for Gal,
another for GlcNAc, and other subsites that may be filled by other sugars and
the aglycone moiety, e.g., protein or lipid. Thus, other sugar residues linked
to the disaccharide Gal-GlcNAc can enhance or decrease binding affinity,
depending on the galectin. Some galectins from fungi, invertebrates, and
mammals (such as galectin-4 and -8) preferentially bind selected
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/)(H) blood group glycans as discussed
above.

[Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/) bind selectively to only
some cell-surface and extracellular matrix ligands at low lectin
concentrations but at higher concentrations they more often show broad binding
to many different glycoproteins. However, the precise physiological ligands
for each galectin and the physiological concentrations of galectins at sites
of interactions are not well understood.

[Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/) can also bind to
exogenous ligands, such as exposed glycans on the surface of viruses,
bacteria, fungi, and parasites, displaying a remarkable diversity of
recognition. For example, galectin-1 can bind to complex type N-glycans on the
HIV-1 gp120 envelope glycoprotein and to _Trichomonas vaginalis_
lipophosphoglycan, whereas galectin-3 recognizes both terminal and internal
[_N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/)
units in lipopolysaccharides from meningococcus ( _Neisseria meningitidis_ ),
LacdiNAc from _Schistosoma mansoni_ , and oligomannans from _Candida
albicans_. The lipophosphoglycan from _Leishmania major_ is recognized by both
galectin-3 and -9, whereas galectin-4 recognizes _Escherichia coli_ strains
that display blood group B glycans.

All members of the galectin family lack a classical signal sequence or
membrane-anchoring domains, and are synthesized on free polysomes in the
cytoplasm and accumulate there before secretion.
[Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/) are unusual among all
types of animal lectins in that they can be found in the nucleus, cytosol,
outer plasma membrane, and extracellular matrix. One rather common
modification of galectins in animal cells is blockage of the amino terminus,
although galectin-3 has been shown to also have two serine residues in its
unique amino-terminal region that can be phosphorylated. Newly synthesized
galectins isolated directly from the cytosol of cells are functional in
binding β-galactosides.

Interestingly, there is compelling evidence for galectins having non-glycan-
binding partners in the cytosol. The complexity of galectin biosynthesis,
secretion, and oligomerization is illustrated schematically for galectin-1 in
[Figure 36.4](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f4/?report=objectonly). Curiously,
the export of galectins from cells does not involve direct movement through
the secretory pathway. It appears the secretion and availability of glycan
ligands in the cells generating the galectin may also regulate export,
activity, and stability of galectins.

Members of the galectin family display a striking functional diversification
that ranges from key roles in early development, tissue regeneration, and
cancer, to immune homeostasis and recognition/effector functions against
potential pathogens. By binding to endogenous glycans, galectins can
contribute to cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions, and galectin signaling
at the cell surface can also modulate cellular functions. In addition,
intracellular galectins may, as in the case of galectins-3, regulate cellular
activities and may contribute to some fundamental processes such as pre-mRNA
splicing ([Figure 36.5](/books/NBK453091/figure/ch36.f5/?report=objectonly)).
The galectin-mediated recognition of glycans on the surface of potential
pathogens and parasites discovered in the past few years has revealed their
role(s) as pattern recognition receptors and effector factors in innate immune
functions. Much information about the biological functions of galectins has
been revealed largely through using galectin-deficient mouse models. Such
studies, which have been performed primarily in mice deficient in galectin-1,
-3, -7, and -9, have revealed roles of galectins in a wide range of
physiological pathways ([Chapter 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)).

Studies in murine and zebrafish models revealed that during early embryonic
stages, galectin-1 and -3 are expressed in the notochord and play subtle,
albeit key roles in notochord development, somitogenesis, and development of
muscle tissue and the central nervous system. Lack of galectin-3 in knockout
mice is associated with several subtle and apparently unrelated phenotypic
changes, whereas lack of galectin-1 in mice is associated with a different set
of phenotypic changes, including decreased sensitivity to noxious thermal
stimuli, altered primary afferent neural anatomy, and aberrant topography of
olfactory axons. In addition, expression of galectin-3 at the onset of
chondrification suggests its role in bone development. Recent studies have
unraveled the critical role of galectin-1 in angiogenesis, as the basis for
resistance of certain tumors to otherwise effective anti-VEGF (vascular
endothelial growth factor)-targeted therapy. It should also be noted that some
galectins are involved in regeneration of injured tissue. For example, on
photoinduced retinal damage in the zebrafish, galectin-1 is one of the first
proteins secreted by stem cells in the Müller glia, and is responsible for rod
regeneration. Galectin-7 is important in the maintenance of epidermal
homeostasis and skin repair.

Several galectins induce apoptosis in some types of blood cells. For
galectin-1, this activity has been studied most in human T cells, where
apoptotic pathways may involve cell-surface glycoproteins, including CD7,
CD29, and CD43. In contrast, for galectin-3 induction of apoptosis in T cells
involves CD71 and CD45. In some cells, apoptotic signaling may function
through down-regulation of Bcl-2 and activation of caspases. The interactions
of galectin-9 with Tim-3 on Th1 cells may induce their apoptosis. In addition,
some galectins, such as galectin-1, -2, and -4, also can induce exposure of
cell-surface phosphatidylserine (PS) independently of apoptotic events. In
addition, overexpression of intracellular galectin-3 shows antiapoptotic
activity, whereas overexpression of galectin-7 and -12 may promote apoptosis
in cells. Some potential intracellular binding partners of galectins,
especially for galectin-3, include several proteins involved in regulating
apoptosis, such as Bcl-2, Fas receptor (CD95), synexin (a Ca++\- and
phospholipid-binding protein), and Alix/Alg-2.

Many tumors overexpress various galectins and their heightened expression
usually correlates with clinical aggressiveness of the tumor as well as the
progression to a metastatic phenotype. The immunosuppressive and apoptotic
effects of galectin-1 can contribute to tumor survival, as revealed by
knockdown studies, in which decreased galectin-1 expression is associated with
decreased tumor survival, owing to increased survival of IFN-γ-producing Th1
cells and heightened T-cell-mediated tumor rejection. Recent studies using
galectin-1 knockout cell lines and mice have shown that expression of
galectin-1 in tumor cell endothelium is essential for tumor angiogenesis,
based on the binding of galectin-1 to complex N-glycans on VEGF receptor 2
(VEGFR2), and activation of VEGF-like signaling. Thus, galectins play
important roles in tumor progression and metastasis through indirect effects
in regulating tumor immune responses and direct effects in tumor angiogenesis.
Although silencing of galectin-3 expression by methylation of its promoter is
associated with early stages of prostate cancer, overexpression of galectin-3
correlates well with neoplastic transformation and tumor progression toward
metastasis.

[Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/) are important as
regulators of immune and inflammatory responses. Galectins are expressed by a
number of different immune and inflammatory cells. In addition, galectins can
promote pro- or antiinflammatory responses, depending on the inflammatory
stimulus, microenvironment, and the target cell. Immune cell responses to
galectins also depend on the specific glycosylation of surface glycoproteins
to generate galectin ligands. However, many of these functions were shown by
using recombinant galectins added to cultured cells. Whether these reflect the
functions of endogenous galectins is not well understood.

Galectin-3 is described to form lattices with cell-surface glycoproteins, for
example, with T-cell receptor (TCR). Expression of such N-glycans is partly
regulated by branching of N-glycans through β6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
V (MGAT-5). _Mgat5_ null T cells show enhanced clustering of TCRs suggesting
that branched N-glycans interacting with galectin-3 may normally restrict TCR
clustering and serve as a hindrance to the development of T-cell responses.
Interestingly, subcutaneous injections of recombinant human galectin-1 and -9
can reduce the severity of several autoimmune diseases in various animal
models, but the underlying mechanisms for these in vivo immunosuppressive
activities are unclear.

Studies of mice deficient in a certain galectin indicate that galectins have
roles in immune responses and inflammation. Studies of isolated cells from
knockout mice have provided some insights. Endogenous galectin-3 plays a role
in phagocytosis by macrophages and mediator release as well as cytokine
production by mast cells. These have been linked to this galectin functioning
intracellularly, in a fashion that is independent of glycan binding.

Current studies suggest a complex set of functions for galectin-3 in
regulating many aspects of inflammatory responses and its role as a
proinflammatory mediator. Although clearly complex, there have been some
exciting developments linking galectins to inflammatory diseases in humans.
Elevated serum galectin-3 levels are associated with a worse prognosis in
patients with heart failure, and the plasma level of galectin-3 is a promising
biomarker for acute coronary syndrome. Studies of galectin-3-knockout mice
suggest a role for galectin-3 in cardiomyopathy and cardiac fibrosis. In other
mouse disease models, endogenous galectin-3 contributes to fibrosis in various
organs and tissues.

Recent studies have revealed critical and opposing roles of galectin-3 and -12
in adipogenesis and their association with obesity, inflammation, and type-2
diabetes. Galectin-12 is expressed in adipocytes and associated with lipid
droplets, and functions as a negative regulator of lipolysis and insulin
sensitivity. Galectin-12 knockout mice show increased lipolysis and reduced
adiposity. In contrast, galectin-3 knockout mice display age-dependent
increased adiposity, dysregulated glucose metabolism, and systemic
inflammation. Furthermore, these mice show accelerated diabetes-associated
kidney damage and diet-induced atherogenesis, with proinflammatory changes in
visceral adipose tissue and pancreas.

[Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/galectins/) can also recognize
exogenous glycans and related moieties on the surfaces of microbial pathogens
and parasites, and function not only as pattern recognition receptors but also
as effector factors, by directly inhibiting adhesion and/or entry into the
host cell, or by directly killing or promoting phagocytosis of the potential
pathogen. For example, galectin MjGal from the kuruma shrimp can recognize
bacterial pathogens and promote their phagocytosis. Galectin-1 directly binds
to Dengue virus and inhibits viral adhesion and internalization into host
cells. Similarly, the zebrafish galectins Drgal1-L2 and Drgal3-L1 interact
directly with the glycosylated envelope of the infectious hematopoietic
necrosis virus and with the glycans on the epithelial cell surface,
significantly reducing viral adhesion. In mammals, the tandem-repeat
galectin-4 and -8 can recognize and kill _E. coli_ strains that display
B-blood group oligosaccharides (BGB+ _E. coli_ ). Mutation of key residues in
either [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/)
revealed that the C-CRD mediates recognition the BGB+ _E. coli_ and promotes
activity toward bacteria. Taken together, the results of these studies
indicate that galectins can function not only in immune recognition but also
as effector factors in innate immune responses against pathogens.

In contrast, some pathogens and parasites can “subvert” the roles of host
galectins in immune defense, to attach to or gain entry into host cells. For
example, galectin-1 promotes infection by HIV-1 by facilitating viral
attachment to CD4 receptors, and increasing infection efficiency. _Leishmania_
species, which are transmitted by sandflies, attach to the insect midgut
epithelium via the sandfly galectin PpGalec that binds to Gal(β1-3) side
chains on the _Leishmania_ lipophosphoglycan (LPG), to prevent their excretion
along with the digested bloodmeal, and allow them to differentiate into free-
swimming infective metacyclics. Similarly, the protozoan parasite _Perkinsus
marinus_ , a facultative intracellular parasite of the eastern oyster
_Crassostrea virginica_ is recognized via the galectins CvGal1 and CvGal2,
that are expressed by phagocytic hemocytes. The parasite is phagocytosed by
the oyster hemocytes and proliferates, eventually causing systemic infection
and death of the oyster host. A recent study identified galectin-1 as the
receptor for the protozoan parasite _T. vaginalis_ , the causative agent of
the most prevalent nonviral sexually transmitted human infection in both women
and men. Like _Leishmania_ spp, _T. vaginalis_ displays a surface LPG rich in
Gal and GlcNAc, which is recognized in a glycan-dependent manner by galectin-1
expressed by the epithelial cells in the cervical linings (as well as
placenta, prostate, endometrial, and decidual tissue), colonized by the
parasite. Related types of studies also show the roles of galectin-1 and -3 in
influenza/pneumococcal pneumonia infections of bronchoalveolar space, and that
galectins might be involved in virus and bacterial binding. The expression of
galectins in animal tissues is tightly regulated, but can be modulated by a
variety of stimuli, including infectious challenge, and this may be especially
important in innate immune responses.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.037

Many microorganisms exploit cell-surface glycans as targets for the
interaction with other cells. Proteins at the surface of microorganisms
(adhesins or agglutinins) mediate the binding to such glycan “receptors,” and
a large number of pathogenic species depend on these interactions for
infection. In addition, antagonistic interactions are mediated by secreted
toxins that use surface glycan targets for internalization by various
mechanisms. This chapter highlights examples of such microbial lectins and
their roles in pathogenicity. In addition, the mode of action of glycan-
dependent toxins is discussed.

Viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa express an enormous array of glycan-
binding proteins, also called lectins. Many of these microbial lectins were
originally detected based on their ability to aggregate or induce the
hemagglutination of red blood cells (erythrocytes). The first microbial
hemagglutinin identified was isolated from the influenza virus, and it was
shown by Alfred Gottschalk in the early 1950s to bind erythrocytes and other
cells via the sialic acid component of host cell-surface glycoconjugates. Don
Wiley and associates crystallized the influenza hemagglutinin and determined
its structure in 1981. Later they solved the structure of hemagglutinin
cocrystals bound to sialyllactose, providing molecular insight into the
affinity and specificity of the receptor-ligand binding sites. Since then, a
number of viral hemagglutinins have been identified and structurally
elucidated.

Nathan Sharon and colleagues first described bacterial surface lectins in the
1970s. Their primary function is to facilitate the attachment or adherence of
bacteria to host cells, a prerequisite for bacterial colonization and
infection ([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Thus, bacterial lectins are
often called adhesins, and these bind corresponding glycan receptors on the
surface of the host cells via carbohydrate-recognition domains (CRDs)
(“receptor” in this case is equivalent to “ligand” for animal cell lectins).
Like animal lectins, some microbial adhesins bind to terminal sugar residues
via the [CRD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydraterecognitiondomaincrd/),
whereas others bind to internal sequences found in linear or branched
oligosaccharide chains. The interaction of adhesins with host glycans is an
important determinant of the tropism of the corresponding pathogen or
symbiont. Detailed studies of the specificity of such microbial lectins have
led to the identification and synthesis of powerful inhibitors of adhesion
that may form the basis for novel therapeutic agents to combat infectious
disease ([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).

Bacteria also produce soluble toxins, whose actions often depend on glycan-
binding subunits that allow the toxin to combine with membrane glycoconjugates
to deliver the functionally active toxic subunit across the membrane. During
the last 30 years, many microbial agglutinins, adhesins, and toxins have been
described, cloned, and characterized.

Colonization of tissues by microorganisms is usually nonpathogenic. For
example, the normal flora of the lower gastrointestinal tract is determined by
appropriate and desirable colonization by beneficial bacteria. Likewise, the
initial formation of nitrogen-fixing nodules in leguminous root tips by
species of _Rhizobium_ involves lectins on the root tip binding to glycan-
containing Nod factors generated by the bacterium ([Chapter
24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)).

By far, the most well-studied example of a viral glycan-binding protein is the
influenza virus hemagglutinin, which binds to sialic acid–containing glycans
on the host cell surface. Although the affinity of this interaction is low,
like that of other lectins with their glycan ligands, the avidity is increased
by hemagglutinin trimerization and a high density of glycan receptors present
on the host cell. This binding event is required for internalization of the
virus by endocytosis and subsequently the pH-dependent fusion of the viral
envelope with the endosomal membrane, ultimately triggering release of the
viral RNA into the cytosol. The specificity of the host glycan-hemagglutinin
interaction varies considerably for different subtypes of influenza. For
example, human strains of influenza-A and -B viruses bind primarily to cells
containing _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Acα)2–6Gal-containing receptors.
However, avian influenza viruses bind to receptors expressing Neu5Acα2–3Gal-,
and porcine strains bind to both Neu5Acα2–6Gal- and -3Gal-containing receptors
([Table 37.1](/books/NBK453032/table/CH37TB1/?report=objectonly)). This
linkage preference is a result of structural differences of the hemagglutinin
([Figure 37.1](/books/NBK453032/figure/ch37.f1/?report=objectonly)). Viral
adherence also depends on receptor abundance, such that tracheal epithelial
cells in humans express glycans with a preponderance of Neu5Acα2–6Gal
linkages, whereas other deeper airway surfaces contain many more
Neu5Acα2–3Gal-terminated glycans. Thus, the specificity of the hemagglutinin
determines the tropism of the virus with respect to species and target cells.
As a result, avian-derived strains have a greater likelihood of producing
lower respiratory tract infection (pneumonia) than common human strains
because of the high abundance of Neu5Acα2-3Gal linkages deep in the lung.
Conversely, avian-derived strains have a reduced likelihood of human-to-human
transmission compared to human strains because of the paucity of Neu5Acα2-3Gal
in the upper respiratory tract. The hemagglutinin is also the major antigen
against which neutralizing antibodies are produced, and antigenic changes in
this protein are in part responsible for new viral outbreaks and considered in
formulation of the annual influenza vaccine.

In addition to the hemagglutinin “H,” influenza-A and -B virions express a
sialidase (traditionally and incorrectly called neuraminidase “N”) that
cleaves sialic acids from glycoconjugates. Its functions may include (1)
prevention of viral aggregation by removal of sialic acid residues from virion
envelope glycoproteins, (2) dissociation of newly synthesized virions inside
the cell or as they bud from the cell surface, and (3) desialylation of
soluble mucins at sites of infection to improve access to membrane-bound
sialic acids. Inhibitors have been designed based on the crystal structure of
the sialidase from influenza-A virus. Some of these (e.g., oseltamivir)
inhibit the enzyme activity at nanomolar concentrations and are used
clinically as antiviral agents ([Chapter 57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)).
Influenza-C virions (and some coronaviruses) contain a single glycoprotein
that possesses both hemagglutinin and receptor-destroying activities, which in
this case is an esterase that cleaves the 9-O-acetyl group from the target
O-acetylated sialic acid receptors ([Figure
37.1](/books/NBK453032/figure/ch37.f1/?report=objectonly)). Some coronaviruses
have evolved further, adapting the spike “S” proteins target O-acetylated
sialic acid receptors.

Rotaviruses, the major killer of children worldwide, can also bind to sialic
acid residues. These viruses only bind to the intestinal epithelium of newborn
infants during a period that appears to correlate with the expression of
specific types and arrangements of sialic acids on glycoproteins. Claims
regarding “sialic acid–independent” rotaviruses may be explained by internal
sialic acids resistant to bacterial sialidases. Many other viruses (e.g.,
adenovirus, reovirus, Sendai virus, and polyomavirus) also use sialic acids
for infection, and crystal structures are now available for several of their
sialic acid–binding domains.

A number of viruses, including herpes simplex virus [HSV], foot-and-mouth
disease virus, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and dengue flavivirus, use
heparan sulfate proteoglycans as adhesion receptors ([Table
37.1](/books/NBK453032/table/CH37TB1/?report=objectonly)). In many cases, the
proteoglycans may be part of a co-receptor system in which viruses make
initial contact with a cell-surface proteoglycan and later with another
receptor. For example, HSV infection is thought to initially involve the
binding of viral glycoproteins gB and/or gC to cell-surface heparan sulfate
proteoglycans. [Glycoprotein](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycoprotein/) gB
promotes virus-cell fusion, syncytium formation (cell–cell fusion), and
adherence, whereas gC binds to the C3b component of the complement receptor
and blocks complement-mediated inhibition of the virus. These events are
followed by HSV glycoprotein gD binding to one of several cell-surface
receptors, including protein receptors and heparan sulfate, ultimately leading
to fusion of the viral envelope with the host-cell plasma membrane.
Interestingly, the interaction of gD with heparan sulfate shows specificity
for a particular substructure in heparan sulfate containing a 3-O-sulfated
glucosamine residue, the formation of which is catalyzed by specific isozymes
of the glucosaminyl 3-O-sulfotransferase gene family. Thus, the heparan-
sulfate-binding adhesins appear to pick out specific carbohydrate units within
the polysaccharide chains as opposed to binding terminal sugars.

Dengue flavivirus, the causative agent of dengue hemorrhagic fever, also binds
to heparan sulfate. Computational modeling to compare the primary dengue viral
envelope protein sequence with the crystal structure of a related virion
envelope protein suggests that the heparan sulfate–binding site may lie along
a positively charged amino acid groove ([Figure
37.2](/books/NBK453032/figure/ch37.f2/?report=objectonly)). The recently
emerging Zika virus belongs to the same family. Furthermore, HIV can bind
heparan sulfate and other sulfated polysaccharides by way of the V3 loop of
its gp120 glycoprotein.

Bacterial lectins occur commonly in the form of elongated, submicroscopic,
multisubunit protein appendages, known as fimbriae (hairs) or pili (threads),
which interact with glycoprotein and glycolipid receptors on host cells.
Similar to viral glycan-binding proteins, adhesin-receptor binding is
generally of low affinity. Because the adhesins and the receptors often
cluster in the plane of the membrane, the resulting combinatorial avidity can
be great. Perhaps an appropriate analogy for adhesin-receptor binding is the
interaction of the two faces of Velcro strips. The most well-characterized
bacterial lectins include the mannose-specific type-1 fimbriae, the galabiose-
specific P fimbriae, and the _N_ -acetylglucosamine-binding F-17 fimbriae,
which are produced by different strains of _Escherichia coli_. Fimbriated
bacteria express 100 to 400 of these appendages, which typically have a
diameter of 5–7 nm and can extend hundreds of nanometers in length ([Figure
37.3](/books/NBK453032/figure/ch37.f3/?report=objectonly)) Thus, pili extend
well beyond the bacterial glycocalyx comprised of lipopolysaccharide and
capsular polysaccharides (see [Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)).

Examination of a high-resolution, three-dimensional structure of FimH bound to
mannose revealed that, although mannose exists as a mixture of α and β anomers
in solution, only the former was found in the complex. Mannose binds FimH at a
deep and negatively charged site of FimH ([Figure
37.4](/books/NBK453032/figure/ch37.f4/?report=objectonly)). FimH has “catch-
bond” properties, such that the binding strength of individual FimH adhesins
is augmented by increasing the shear forces on surface-bound _E. coli_ cells.
This is relevant for urinary tract infections, in which type-1 fimbriae
mediate binding of the bacteria to the glycoprotein uroplakin Ia on the
surface of bladder epithelial cells. Uroplakin Ia presents high levels of
terminally exposed mannose residues that are capable of specifically
interacting with FimH. Alternatively, type-1 fimbriae can bind to the soluble
urinary Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein, which inhibits bacterial adhesion. Indeed,
mice lacking the Tamm–Horsfall gene are considerably more susceptible to
bladder colonization by type-1-fimbriated _E. coli_ than normal mice, whereas
they are equally susceptible to P-fimbriated _E. coli_ that bind a different
glycoprotein receptor.

Most bacteria (and possibly other microorganisms) have multiple adhesins with
diverse carbohydrate specificities. Many of these have been described
(examples in [Table 37.2](/books/NBK453032/table/CH37TB2/?report=objectonly)),
wherein the specificity of lectin binding can help define the range of
susceptible tissues in the host (i.e., the microbe's ecological niche). The
columnar epithelium that lines the large intestine expresses receptors with
Galα1–4Gal-Cer residues, whereas cells lining the small intestine do not.
Thus, _Bacterioides, Clostridium, E. coli,_ and _Lactobacillus_ only colonize
the large intestine under normal conditions. P-fimbriated _E. coli_ and some
toxins bind specifically to galabiose (Galα1–4Gal) and galabiose-containing
oligosaccharides, most commonly as constituents of glycolipids. Binding can
occur to either internal (i.e., when the disaccharide is capped by other
sugars) or terminal nonreducing galabiose units. P-fimbriated _E. coli_ adhere
mainly to the upper part of the kidney, where galabiose is abundant. The fine
specificity of bacterial surface lectins and their relationship to the animal
tropism of the bacteria can be further illustrated by _E. coli_ K99. This
organism binds to glycolipids that contain _N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid
(Neu5Gc), in the form of Neu5Gcα2–3Galβ1–4Glc, but not to those that contain
_N_ -acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac). These two sugars differ by a single
hydroxyl group that is present only on Neu5Gc. Interestingly, Neu5Gc-
containing receptors are expressed on the intestinal cells of newborn piglets,
but disappear as the animals grow and develop. As Neu5Gc is not normally
biosynthesized by humans, this may explain why _E. coli_ K99 can cause often
lethal diarrhea in piglets but not in adult pigs or humans.

A number of secreted bacterial toxins also bind glycans ([Table
37.3](/books/NBK453032/table/CH37TB3/?report=objectonly)). The toxin from
_Vibrio cholera_ (cholera toxin), which consists of A and B subunits in the
ratio AB5, has been extensively studied. The crystal structure of cholera
toxin shows that the carbohydrate-recognition domains are located at the base
of the B subunits, which bind to the Galβ1–3GalNAc moiety of GM1 ganglioside
([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) receptors ([Figure
37.5](/books/NBK453032/figure/ch37.f5/?report=objectonly)). Upon binding of
the B subunits to membrane glycolipids, the AB5 complex is endocytosed to the
Golgi apparatus and then undergoes retrograde transport to the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). The A1 and A2 chains are proteolytically cleaved on toxin
secretion, but remain stably associated until arrival in the ER. There, the
enzymatic A1 chain unfolds, dissociates from the A2-B5 complex, and
retrotranslocates to the cytosol where it rapidly refolds, thereby avoiding
degradation by the proteasome. Catalytically active A1 then ADP-ribosylates a
regulatory homotrimeric G-protein to activate adenylyl cyclase, severely
altering ion homeostasis of the infected cell.

Shiga toxin, produced by _Shigella dysenteriae_ , will bind to Galα1-4Gal
determinants on both glycolipids and glycoproteins. However, only binding to
the glycosphingolipid receptor Gb3 results in cell death. Similar to cholera
toxin, the AB5 complex is endocytosed and transported to the ER of the target
cells, and then the A1 subunit is retrotranslocated to the cytosol. There, the
catalytic A1 chain of shiga toxin inactivates ribosomes, and thus the
essential process of cytoplasmic protein synthesis, by an N-glycosidic
cleavage event that depurinates 28S rRNA.

Crystal toxins (Bt toxins) are produced by the soil-dwelling bacterium
_Bacillus thuringiensis_ (Bt). Bt toxins are used for crop protection by
spraying plants or by genetically engineering crops to express the toxins. Bt
belongs to the most common class of bacterial toxins that are characterized by
their pore-forming capability. As such, these toxins function by binding
glycolipids that line the gut and generating pores in the membrane. More
specifically, the Bt toxin glycolipid receptors include in their structure the
characteristic ceramide-linked, mannose-containing core tetrasaccharide
GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Manβ1-4GlcβCer. This structure is conserved between
nematodes and insects (see [Chapter 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)), but is absent
in vertebrates including. This explains why Bt can kill larval stages of
insects but is harmless to humans.

In addition to viruses and bacteria, a number of parasites use glycans as
receptors for adhesion ([Table
37.4](/books/NBK453032/table/CH37TB4/?report=objectonly)). _Entamoeba
histolytica_ expresses a 260-kDa heterodimeric lectin that binds to terminal
Gal/GalNAc residues on glycoproteins and glycolipids via a cysteine-rich
glycan-binding domain. T his adhesin is essential for virulence, such that
adhesin-glycan binding is required for parasitic attachment, invasion, and
cytolysis of the intestinal epithelium. Furthermore, it may function in
binding _E. histolytica_ to bacteria as a food source. The adhesin elicits
protective immunity, and is a potential target to manage _E. histolytica_
infection (43).

The initial interaction of _Plasmodium falciparum_ (malaria) merozoites with
red blood cells (erythrocytes) depends on sialic acid residues present on the
host cell, in particular on the major erythrocyte membrane protein
glycophorin. Parasite-host attachment is mediated by a family of sialic acid-
binding adhesins on merozoites, the most prominent of which is called
erythrocyte-binding antigen-175 (EBA-175). This adhesin preferentially binds
Neu5Ac sialic acids, rather than 9- _O_ -acetyl-Neu5Ac or Neu5Gc, and is
sensitive to the linkage of the sialic acid to the underlying galactose. This
is highlighted by the fact that Neu5Acα2–3Gal-containing oligosaccharides
effectively inhibit the binding of EBA-175 to erythrocytes, whereas soluble
Neu5Ac and Neu5Acα2–6Gal-containing oligosaccharides do not.
[Adhesin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/adhesin/)-glycan binding triggers
invasion of the merozoites into red blood cells, where they develop into
mature schizonts that rupture and release newly formed merozoites into the
bloodstream. Many commonly used clinical anti-malarial medications, such as
chloroquine, target the parasite during this erythrocytic asexual reproduction
stage.

Lectins mediate adhesion of microorganisms to host cells or tissues, which is
a prerequisite for infection and/or symbiosis to occur. Consequently, lectin-
deficient microbial mutants are often unable to initiate infection.
Interestingly, glycans recognized by microbial surface lectins have been shown
to block the adhesion of bacteria to animal cells in vitro and in vivo, and
thus may protect animals against infection by such microorganisms. For
example, coadministration of methyl α-mannoside with type-1-fimbriated _E.
coli_ into the bladder of mice significantly reduces the rate of urinary tract
infection, whereas methyl α-glucoside, which does not bind to FimH, has no
effect. Furthermore, Lacto-N-neotetraose (LNnT) and its α2-3- and
α2-6-sialylated derivatives block the adherence of _Streptococcus pneumoniae_
to respiratory epithelial cells in vitro. In addition, these glycans prevent
colonization of the nasopharynx and attenuate the course of pneumonia in
rodent models of pneumococcal infection.

Exogenous heparin and structurally related polysaccharides are known to
inhibit viral replication, suggesting a potential approach for the development
of polysaccharide-based antiviral pharmaceutical agents. For example, heparin
octasaccharide decoy liposomes were recently shown to inhibit the replication
of numerous viruses including HSV and respiratory syncytial virus. As more
crystal structures are elucidated, the ability to design small-molecule
inhibitors that fit into the carbohydrate-recognition domains of adhesins
should improve. Already, the structures of influenza hemagglutinin and
sialidase have suggested numerous ways to modify sialic acid to fit better
into the active sites. Some of these compounds are presently in clinical use
to limit the spread of influenza.

The authors acknowledge contributions to the previous version of this chapter
from Jeffrey D. Esko and the late Nathan Sharon and helpful comments and
suggestions from Taroh Kinoshita, Andreas Geissner, Jennifer Groves, Robyn
Peterson, and Paeton L. Wantuch.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.038

[Glycosaminoglycans](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosaminoglycans/) bind to
many different classes of proteins mostly through electrostatic interactions
between negatively charged sulfate groups and uronic acids and positively
charged amino acids in the protein. This chapter focuses on examples of
glycosaminoglycan (GAG)-binding proteins, methods for measuring GAG–protein
interaction, and information about three-dimensional structures of the
complexes.

Several hundred GAG-binding proteins have been discovered, which make up the
GAG-interactome and fall into the broad classes presented in [Table
38.1](/books/NBK453026/table/CH38TB1/?report=objectonly). To a large extent,
studies of the GAG-interactome have focused on protein interactions with
heparin, a more highly sulfated, iduronic acid (IdoA)-rich form of heparan
sulfate (HS; [Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). This bias reflects, in
part, the commercial availability of heparin and heparin-Sepharose, which are
frequently used for fractionation studies, and the partially incorrect
assumption that binding to heparin mimics binding to HS present on cell
surfaces and in the extracellular matrix. In comparison, relatively few
proteins are known to interact with chondroitin sulfate (CS) or keratan
sulfate (KS) with comparable avidity and affinity. In some cases, CS and the
related GAG, dermatan sulfate (DS), may be physiologically relevant binding
partners because these GAGs predominate in many tissues. Determining the
physiological relevance of these interactions is a major area of research.

In contrast to lectins, which tend to fall into evolutionarily conserved
families ([Chapters 28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)–[37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)),
GAG-binding proteins do not have common folds and instead appear to have
evolved by convergent evolution. Interactions between GAGs and proteins can
have profound physiological effects on processes such as hemostasis, lipid
transport and absorption, cell growth and migration, and development ([Table
38.1](/books/NBK453026/table/CH38TB1/?report=objectonly)). Binding to GAGs can
result in immobilization of proteins at their sites of production or in the
extracellular matrix for future mobilization, regulation of enzyme activity,
binding of ligands to their receptors, protein oligomerization, and protection
of proteins against degradation. In some cases, the interaction may reflect
complementarity of charge (e.g., histone–heparin interactions) rather than any
specific biologically relevant interaction. In other cases, the interaction
has been shown to depend on rare but very specific sequences of modified
sugars in the GAG chain (e.g., antithrombin binding).

Numerous methods are available for analyzing GAG–protein interactions, and
some provide a direct measurement of Kd values. A common method involves
affinity fractionation of proteins on Sepharose columns containing covalently
linked GAG chains, usually heparin. The bound proteins are eluted with
different concentrations of sodium chloride, and the concentration required
for elution is generally proportional to the Kd. High-affinity interactions
require at least 1 m NaCl to displace bound ligand, which translates into Kd
values of 10−7–10−9 m (determined under physiological salt concentrations by
equilibrium binding). Proteins with low affinity (10−4–10−6 m) either do not
bind under “normal” conditions (0.15 m NaCl) or require only 0.3–0.5 m NaCl to
elute. This method is based on the assumption that GAG–protein interaction is
entirely ionic, which is not entirely correct. Nevertheless, it can provide an
assessment of relative affinity, when comparing different GAG-binding
proteins.

A number of more sophisticated methods are now in use that provide detailed
thermodynamic data (Δ _H_ [change in enthalpy], Δ _S_ [change in entropy], Δ
_Cp_ [change in molar heat capacity], etc.), kinetic data (association and
dissociation rates), and high-resolution data on atomic contacts in
GAG–protein interactions ([Table
38.2](/books/NBK453026/table/CH38TB2/?report=objectonly)). Regardless of the
technique one uses, it must be kept in mind that in vitro binding measurements
are not likely to be the same as those when the protein binds to proteoglycans
on the cell surface or in the extracellular matrix, where the density and
variety of GAG-binding proteins, proteoglycans, and other interacting factors
varies greatly. To determine the physiological relevance of the interaction,
one should consider measuring binding under conditions that can lead to a
biological response. For example, one can measure binding to cells with
altered GAG composition ([Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)) or after
treatment with specific lyases to remove GAG chains from the cell surface
([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) and then determine whether the same
response occurs as observed in the presence of GAG chains. The interaction can
then be studied more intensively using the in vitro assays described above.

As mentioned above, most GAG-binding proteins interact with HS or heparin. The
likely basis for this preference is greater sequence heterogeneity and more
variable sulfation, compared with other GAGs. The unusual conformational
flexibility of iduronic acid, which is found in heparin, HS, and DS, also has
a role in their ability to bind proteins. GAGs are linear helical structures,
consisting of alternating residues of _N_ -acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) or _N_
-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) with glucuronic acid (GlcA) or IdoA (with the
exception of KSs, which consist of alternating GlcNAc and galactose residues;
[Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Inspection of heparin oligosaccharides
containing highly modified domains ([GlcNS6S-IdoA2S]n) shows that the _N_
-sulfo and 6- _O_ -sulfo groups of each disaccharide repeat lie on opposite
sides of the helix from the 2- _O_ -sulfo and carboxyl groups ([Figure
38.1](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f1/?report=objectonly)). Analysis of the
conformation of individual sugars shows that GlcNAc and GlcA residues assume a
preferred conformation in solution, designated 4C1 (indicating that carbon 4
is above the plane defined by carbons 2, 3, and 5 and the ring oxygen, and
that carbon 1 is below the plane; [Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)). In
contrast, IdoA2S assumes the 1C4 or the 2SO conformation ([Figure
38.1](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f1/?report=objectonly)), which reorients
the position of the sulfo substituents, thereby creating a different
orientation of charged groups. In many cases when a protein binds to an HS
chain, it induces a change in conformation of the IdoA2S residue resulting in
a better fit and enhanced binding. IdoA2S residues have always been found in
domains rich in _N_ -sulfo and _O_ -sulfo groups (for biosynthetic reasons;
[Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), which is also where proteins usually
bind. Thus, the greater degree of conformational flexibility in these modified
regions may explain why so many more proteins bind with high affinity to
heparin, HS, and DS than to other GAGs. The presence of an _N_ -acetyl group
in a GlcNAc residue changes the preferred conformation of the neighboring
IdoA2S residue, showing that even minor modifications can influence
conformation and chain flexibility. Binding to GAGs that have a low degree of
sulfation may require larger domains in the protein to interact with longer
stretches of an oligosaccharide. Molecular dynamic simulations on large
heparin oligosaccharides are possible with the availability of supercomputers
([Online Appendix 38A](/books/n/glyco3/app_simulation/)). Such simulations can
be used to predict the conformational flexibility of different domains within
the chain and, when combined with recent advances in protein–GAG docking, can
provide additional insights into GAG–protein interactions.

The discovery of multiple GAG-binding proteins led a number of investigators
to examine whether there is a consensus amino acid sequence for GAG binding.
In retrospect, this strategy was overly simplistic because it assumed that all
GAG-binding proteins have a common evolutionary origin, and would recognize
the same oligosaccharide sequence within heparin, or at least, sequences that
would share many common features. It is now known that the convergently
evolved GAG-binding proteins interact with different oligosaccharide
sequences. The binding sites in the protein always contain basic amino acids
(lysine and arginine), whose positive charges presumably interact with the
negatively charged sulfates and carboxylates of the GAG chains. However, the
arrangement of these basic amino acids can be quite variable, consistent with
the variable positioning of sulfo groups in the GAG partner.

Most proteins are formed from α-helices, β-strands, and loops. Therefore, to
engage a linear GAG chain, the positively charged amino acid residues must
align along the same side of the protein segment. α-Helices have periodicities
of 3.4 residues per turn, which would require the basic residues to occur
every third or fourth position along the helix to align with an
oligosaccharide. In β-strands, the side chains alternate sides every other
residue. Thus, to bind a GAG chain, the positively charged residues in a
β-strand would be located quite differently than in an α-helix.

On the basis of the structure of several heparin-binding proteins that were
available in 1991, Alan Cardin and Herschel Weintraub proposed that typical
heparin-binding sites had the sequence XBBXBX or XBBBXXBX, where B is lysine
or arginine and X is any other amino acid. From the structural arguments
provided above, it should be obvious that only some of the basic residues in
these sequences could participate in GAG binding, the actual number being
determined by whether the peptide sequence exists as an α-helix or a β-sheet.
It is now known that the presence of these sequences in a protein merely
suggests a possible interaction with heparin (or another GAG chain), but it
does not prove that the interaction occurs under physiological conditions. In
fact, the predicted binding sites for heparin in fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF2) turned out to be incorrect once the crystal structure was determined.
It is likely that binding involves multiple protein segments that juxtapose
positively charged residues into a three-dimensional turn-rich recognition
site. In many cases the binding involves loops which make the positioning more
variable. An example of this phenomenon is observed in the chemokine CCL5,
which contains a BBXB motif in a loop. The specific arrangement of residues
should vary according to the type and fine structure of those oligosaccharides
involved in binding.

In lectins, and in antibodies that recognize glycans, the glycan recognition
domains are typically shallow pockets that engage the terminal sugars of the
oligosaccharide chain ([Chapters 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/),
[30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/), and [37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). In GAG-binding
proteins, the protein usually binds to sugar residues that lie within the
chain or near the terminus. Therefore, the binding sites in GAG-binding
proteins consist of clefts or sets of juxtaposed surface residues rather than
pockets. These GAG-binding sites on the protein surface give rise to more
rapid GAG–protein binding kinetics than are typically observed for
protein–protein interactions. Given that GAG chains generally exist in a
helical conformation, only those residues on the face toward the protein
interact with amino acid residues; the ones on the other side of the helix are
potentially free to interact with a second ligand (e.g., as observed in FGF
dimers). Alternatively, residues in a binding cleft could interact with both
sides of the helix (e.g., in dengue envelope protein). Finally, one should
keep in mind that binding occurs to only a small segment of the GAG chain.
Thus, a single GAG chain can potentially bind multiple protein ligands
facilitating cooperative binding that can lead to protein oligomerization
(e.g., some chemokines).

Perhaps the best-studied example of a protein–GAG interaction is the binding
of antithrombin to heparin and HS (see cover image and [Figure
38.2](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f2/?report=objectonly)). This interaction
is of great pharmacological importance because heparin is widely used
clinically as an anticoagulant. Binding of antithrombin to heparin has a dual
effect: first, it causes a conformational change in the protein and activation
of the protease inhibiting action, resulting in a 1000-fold enhancement in the
rate at which it inactivates thrombin and factor Xa. Second, the heparin chain
acts as a template, enhancing the physical apposition of thrombin and
antithrombin. Thus, both the protease (thrombin) and the inhibitor have GAG-
binding sites. [Heparin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/heparin/) acts as a
catalyst in these reactions by enhancing the rate of the reaction through
apposition of substrates and conformational change. After the inactivation of
thrombin by antithrombin occurs, the complex loses affinity for heparin and
dissociates. The heparin is then available to participate in another
activation/inactivation cycle. Antithrombin is a member of the serpin family
of protease inhibitors, many of which bind to heparin.

Early studies using affinity fractionation schemes showed that only about one-
third of the chains in a heparin preparation actually bind with high affinity
to antithrombin. Comparing the sequence of the bound chains with those that
did not bind failed to reveal any substantial differences in composition,
consistent with the later discovery that the binding site consists of only
five sugar residues ([Figure
38.2](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f2/?report=objectonly)) (the average
heparin chain is about 50 sugar residues). This observation can be extended to
virtually all GAG-binding proteins, inferring that the binding sites represent
a very small segment of the chains.

Crystals of antithrombin were prepared and analyzed by X-ray diffraction to
2.6-Å resolution. The docking site for the heparin pentasaccharide is formed
by the apposition of helices A and D, which both contain critical arginine and
lysine residues at the interface. The sequence in the D helix
(124AKLNCRLYRKANKSSKLVSANR145) places many of the positively charged residues
on one face of the helix, in proximity to the arginine residues in the A helix
(41PEATNRRVW49) ([Figure
38.2](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f2/?report=objectonly)). The
pentasaccharide is sufficient to activate antithrombin binding toward factor
Xa, but it will not facilitate the inactivation of thrombin. For this to
occur, a larger oligosaccharide of at least 18 residues is needed. As
mentioned above, thrombin also contains a heparin-binding site, and the larger
heparin oligosaccharide is thought to act as a template for the formation of a
ternary complex with thrombin and antithrombin. In contrast to antithrombin,
thrombin shows little oligosaccharide specificity. As might be expected,
adding high concentrations of heparin actually inhibits the reaction, because
the formation of binary complexes of heparin and thrombin or heparin and
antithrombin predominate. This important principle of “activation at low
concentrations and inhibition at high concentrations” also occurs in other
systems in which ternary complexes form ([Chapters 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)
and [30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)).

[Heparin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/heparin/) is a pharmaceutical
formulation produced by partial fractionation of natural GAGs derived
primarily from porcine intestines or bovine lungs ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Mast cells are known to produce a highly sulfated
version of HS that resembles heparin; highly sulfated, iduronic acid–rich
heparin oligosaccharides are also present in HS isolated from other tissues as
well, especially the skin. Although heparin has proven to be of great
therapeutic use, its role in vivo remains unclear. Heparin and CS are often
found in storage granules along with biogenic amines, proteases, and other
proteins, possibly enabling efficient storage. Mast cells degranulate in
response to specific antigen stimulation, resulting in release of stored
heparin, histamine, and proteases. When this occurs, local anticoagulation
might occur, but localized coagulation defects have not been described in
animals bearing mutations that alter mast cells or heparin. A small percentage
of endothelial cell HS contains antithrombin-binding sequences as well.
However, these binding sites appear to be located on the abluminal side of
blood vessels, and mice lacking the central 3- _O_ -sulfated GlcNS unit, a
hallmark of the antithrombin-binding sequence ([Figure
38.2](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f2/?report=objectonly)), do not show any
systemic coagulopathy after birth. Nevertheless, antithrombin deficiency
causes massive disseminated coagulopathy. Perhaps these findings indicate that
lower-affinity binding sequences are sufficient to activate antithrombin. This
system illustrates an important caveat: one cannot necessarily ascribe
functions to endogenous proteoglycans based on the effects of GAGs added in
vitro to experimental systems.

A large number of growth factors can be purified based on their affinity for
heparin. The heparin-binding family of FGFs has grown to more than 22 members
and includes the prototype FGF2, otherwise known as basic fibroblast growth
factor. FGF2 has a very high affinity for heparin (Kd ∼ 10−9 m) and requires
1.5–2 m NaCl to elute from heparin-Sepharose. FGF2 has potent mitogenic
activity in cells that express one of the FGF signaling receptors (FGFRs; four
FGFR genes are known and multiple splice variants exist). Cell-surface HS
binds to both FGF2 and FGFR, facilitating the formation of a ternary complex.
Both binding and the mitogenic response are greatly stimulated by heparin or
HS, which promotes dimerization of the ligand–receptor complex.

The costimulatory role of HS (and heparin) in this system is reminiscent of
the heparin/antithrombin/thrombin story. Indeed, the minimal binding sequence
for FGF2 also consists of a pentasaccharide. However, this pentasaccharide is
not sufficient to trigger a biological response (mitogenesis). For this to
occur, a longer oligosaccharide (10-mer) containing the minimal sequence and
additional 6- _O_ -sulfo groups are needed to bind FGFR. The sequence that
binds to both FGF2 and FGFR is prevalent in heparin but rare in HS. The
requirement for this rare binding sequence reduces the probability of finding
this particular arrangement in naturally occurring HS chains. Thus, some
preparations of HS are inactive in mitogenesis, and those containing only one-
half of the bipartite binding sequence are actually inhibitory.

The structure of FGF2 cocrystallized with a heparin hexasaccharide has since
been obtained ([Figure
38.3](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f3/?report=objectonly)). The heparin
fragment ([GlcNS6Sα1-4IdoA2Sα1-4]3) was helical and bound to a turn-rich
heparin-binding site on the surface of FGF2. Only one _N_ -sulfo group and the
2- _O_ -sulfo group from the adjacent iduronic acid are bound to the growth
factor in the turn-rich binding domain, and the next GlcNS residue is bound to
a second site, consistent with the minimal binding sequence determined with
oligosaccharide fragments. No significant conformational change in FGF2 occurs
on heparin binding, consistent with the idea that heparin primarily serves to
dimerize FGF2 and juxtapose components of the FGF signal-transduction pathway.
The crystal structure of acidic FGF (FGF1) has also been solved and shows
similar sequences on its surface. However, the oligosaccharide sequence that
binds with high affinity to FGF1 contains 6- _O_ -sulfo groups.

The cocrystal structure of the complex of (FGF2-FGFR)2, first solved in the
absence of heparin/HS ligand, showed a canyon of positively charged amino acid
residues, suggestive of an unoccupied heparin-binding site. Subsequently, the
heparin–oligosaccharide-containing complex was solved after introduction of
heparin oligosaccharides, suggesting a 2:2:2 complex of FGF2:FGFR:HS ([Figure
38.3](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f3/?report=objectonly)). Another important
feature of this complex is the orientation of the nonreducing ends of the HS
chains that terminate in an _N_ -sulfoglucosamine residue, which arises by
endolytic cleavage of chains by the enzyme heparanase ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). The structure of the FGF–FGFR–HS complex is not
without controversy; structural analysis of complexes formed in solution and
purified by gel filtration has suggested a very different structure consisting
of a 2:2:1 complex ([Figure
38.3](/books/NBK453026/figure/ch38.f3/?report=objectonly)).

In some cases, the interaction of GAG chains with proteins may depend on metal
cofactors. For example, L- and P-selectins have been shown to bind to a
subfraction of HS chains and heparin in a divalent-cation-dependent manner.
This observation raises the possibility that other examples of cation-
dependent interactions with GAG chains may exist. GAG binding to L-selectin
helps in leukocyte rolling. Furthermore, the interaction can be
pharmacologically inhibited by exogenous heparin at clinically acceptable
doses, and also by chemically modified derivatives that lack anticoagulant
activity.

CS proteoglycans in the central nervous system (CNS) influence cell migration
and axon pathfinding and regulate neurite outgrowth. The interaction of rare,
highly sulfated disaccharide sequences in CS chains with morphogens and growth
factors impact CNS development and play roles in CNS pathology.

HS proteoglycans are often expressed in a spatially and temporally limited
fashion. The temporary placement of an HS proteoglycan at a specific tissue
site might or might not coincide with the presence of its appropriate protein
ligand. Furthermore, if the binding partner has no access to the HS
proteoglycan, it cannot interact—adding an additional level of specificity.
Recent studies show that the fine structure of HS chains also changes during
development, thus enabling or disabling specific associations between ligands
and receptors.

Gradients of morphogens, factors that determine cell fates based on
concentration, also determine the patterns of cell and tissue organization
during development ([Chapters
25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)–[27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)). The mechanism of
morphogen gradient formation is controversial, but interestingly, virtually
all morphogens can interact with heparin and HS. These interactions can affect
transport of ligands, receptor interactions, endocytosis, and degradation,
which together may have a role in determining the robustness of the gradient.
The GAG chains of proteoglycans also offer a linear domain over which proteins
can diffuse. By limiting the space available to these proteins from the three-
dimensional space of extracellular fluids and the extracellular matrix to one-
dimensional space along the chains, the chance of encounters among heparin-
binding proteins, such as FGF and its receptor (FGFR), may be enhanced. Thus,
the critical role of HS proteoglycans may be in controlling the kinetics of
protein–protein interactions rather than the thermodynamics of such
encounters.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Kristian Saied-
Santiago, Eathen Ryan, Patience Sanderson, and Kristin Stanford.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.039

N-Glycans affect glycoprotein folding because of their hydrophilic nature. In
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the processing of N-glycans yields a series of
truncated N-glycans that serve as checkpoints that dictate the life or death
of many newly made membrane and secreted proteins. Other glycan modifications
also may affect glycoprotein folding in the ER. This chapter describes glycan-
mediated quality-control processes in the ER and Golgi apparatus and what
happens to glycoproteins that fail their “final folding examination.”

During protein synthesis, nascent polypeptides begin to assume their final
three-dimensional conformation by passing through folding intermediates
dictated, to a large extent, by their primary sequence. Proper folding
involves the formation of secondary structures (α-helices and β-strands),
burying of hydrophobic residues in the interior of the protein, the formation
of disulfide bonds, and quaternary associations via oligomerization or
multimerization. Together, these processes prevent unwanted protein
aggregation that would interfere with protein functions. To make folding more
efficient, cells use various chaperones. Two major cytoplasmic chaperone
families consist of heat-shock proteins in the _hsp60_ and _hsp70_ gene
families that bind to exposed hydrophobic domains on misfolded proteins and
maintain their solubility as they acquire their final conformation. They also
participate in the repair of damaged proteins and proteins that have not
properly multimerized. Improperly folded proteins that fail to mature are
eventually tagged by ubiquitination, which then leads to degradation by the
proteasome.

Membrane proteins and proteins destined for secretion also undergo quality
control during folding. Membrane and secretory proteins originate on membrane-
bound ribosomes; translation and translocation into the lumen of the ER occur
simultaneously in most cases. However, certain proteins are fully synthesized
in the cytosol and translocated into the ER lumen posttranslationally. This
latter process is more relevant in yeast than mammalian cells. The ER lumen is
highly specialized for protein folding: its oxidizing environment promotes
disulfide bond formation and it is the main cellular reservoir of Ca++. To aid
proper folding a battery of molecular chaperones is present, including
BiP/Grp78 (a glucose-regulated protein and member of the hsp70 family of
chaperones), Grp94, and Grp170. In addition, the ER contains enzymes that
promote proline _cis–trans_ isomerization and protein disulfide bond
formation, such as protein disulfide isomerases (PDI and ERp57, ERp59, and
ERp72). The expression of many of these proteins increases during stress
responses.

Unlike cytoplasmic proteins, most membrane and secreted proteins undergo
modification with N-glycans ([Figure
39.1](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f1/?report=objectonly)) as they enter the
ER lumen. Oligosaccharyltransferase requires flexible domains of a polypeptide
for glycosylation, and thus N-glycosylation evolved in eukaryotes to occur
before protein folding. Accordingly, N-linked glycans affect the folding of
glycoproteins directly by altering the biophysical properties of the protein.
They can serve as signals to localize the folding machinery and to signal the
folding status of the poylpeptide. To achieve glycan-mediated folding,
N-glycans are recognized by two lectin-like chaperones in the ER: calnexin
(CNX) and calreticulin (CRT). These specialized chaperones require Ca++ for
activity and bind to monoglucosylated forms of N-glycans, thus retaining the
protein in the ER until proper folding occurs. The ER also contains three
enzymes central to the process: α-glucosidases I and II (GI and GII), which
trim glucose (Glc) from the Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 initially transferred to the
protein and release the glycoprotein from CNX/CRT. The enzyme UDP-glucose
glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (UGGT) reglucosylates the N-glycan if proper
folding has not occurred. Glycoproteins that fail to fold, or to oligomerize
properly, are marked with specific truncated N-glycans, and eventually
retrotranslocated into the cytoplasm where they are destroyed by
N-deglycosylation and proteasomal degradation, a process called ER-associated
degradation (ERAD). There are several ERAD pathways, which are described in
the following sections.

N-[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) in the ER is
considerably different from other types of glycosylation. It begins with the
“en bloc” transfer of a 14-monosaccharide glycan to the polypeptide as it
exits the translocon complex ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). In
vertebrates, addition of the N-glycan occurs on incompletely folded
polypeptides. In bacteria, N-glycosylation can occur both on nascent
polypeptides and on fully mature proteins ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). N-Glycans modify the physical properties of
glycoproteins by providing noncharged, bulky, hydrophilic groups that keep the
protein in solution during folding. They also modulate protein conformation by
forcing amino acids near the N-glycan into a hydrophilic environment.

N-[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) processing starts immediately
after transfer of the precursor sugar chain to the protein in the lumen of the
ER. GI removes the terminal α1-2Glc and GII then removes both α1-3Glc units
([Figure 39.1](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f1/?report=objectonly)). Although
GII may remove the second Glc (designated m in [Figure
39.1](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f1/?report=objectonly)) from glycoproteins
with a single N-glycan, the trimming of the second Glc occurs more efficiently
when there is a second N-glycan on the same protein. Depending on cell type, a
variable number of Man residues may also be removed while glycoproteins remain
in the ER. GII is an ER-soluble, heterodimeric protein. Its 100–110 kDa
α-subunit contains the catalytic activity, whereas the 50–60-kDa β-subunit
displays a canonical ER retention/retrieval sequence (XDEL), which is
partially responsible for the subcellular location of the whole enzyme. The
carboxy-terminal portion of the β-subunit contains a mannose receptor
homologous (MRH) domain that is homologous to the domain in the Golgi
mannose-6-phosphate receptor responsible for recognizing lysosomal enzymes,
and their delivery to lysosomes ([Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and
[33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). The affinity of the GII MRH domain is higher for
the Man9GlcNAc2 (M9) N-glycan and decreases for truncated N-glycans.
Consequently, the GII activity toward N-glycans diminishes for truncated
N-glycans created by ER mannosidases.

CNX and CRT bind to glycoproteins containing a single α1–3Glc residue ([Figure
39.2](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f2/?report=objectonly)). CNX is a type I
transmembrane protein and CRT is soluble, but both have ER retention/retrieval
signals at their carboxyl terminus, retaining them in the ER. They have
structurally similar lectin domains and comprise part of a large, weakly
associated heterogeneous protein network that includes BiP/Grp78, ERp57,
Grp94, and other ER-resident proteins that assist protein folding. Thereby,
they act as interpreters of the N-glycan code to localize the folding
machinery to a glycoprotein substrate. Both CNX and CRT are monovalent, low-
affinity lectins for monoglucosylated, oligomannosyl N-glycans, but because of
their different membrane-bound or soluble status within the ER lumen, their in
vivo specificities are not identical. CNX mainly interacts with N-glycans
close to the ER membrane, whereas CRT binds preferentially to glycoproteins in
the ER lumen, or to those that have large luminal domains. Binding of
incompletely folded glycoproteins to the CNX/CRT complex prevents their exit
from the ER and enhances folding efficiency by preventing aggregation and
premature oligomerization/degradation, and by facilitating the formation of
native disulfide bonds. This latter task is performed by ERp57, a CNX/CRT-
associated oxidoreductase. CNX and CRT are, therefore, unconventional
chaperones that do not directly recognize protein moieties of folding
intermediates like conventional chaperones, but rather they recognize
particular N-glycans in the folding intermediates.

Removal of the final Glc residue from N-glycans by GII prevents binding of the
protein to CNX/CRT. If properly folded, these glycoproteins are packaged into
COPII-coated vesicles and transferred to the Golgi ([Figure
39.2](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f2/?report=objectonly)). However, if they
remain unfolded, UGGT adds a single α1–3Glc to the glycan, thus recreating the
identical N-glycan first recognized by CNX/CRT. Therefore, UGGT has the
remarkable property of exclusively glucosylating glycoproteins that display a
nonnative conformation. UGGT discriminates between different nonnative
conformers, and preferentially glucosylates glycoproteins in their last stages
of folding when they are displaying exposed hydrophobic amino acid patches
(molten globules). In vitro, the enzyme also recognizes N-glycans linked to
relatively short hydrophobic peptides or to hydrophobic aglycones, although
less efficiently. Contrary to BiP/Grp78 that preferentially binds extended
hydrophobic _sequences_ , UGGT recognizes hydrophobic _surfaces_. This
difference determines that glycoproteins are first recognized by chaperones
like BiP/Grp78 and only later, at final folding stages, are epitopes created
by UGGT recognized by CNX/CRT. UGGT modifies N-glycans located in the relative
vicinity of amino acids that prevent rapid folding of a glycoprotein.

UGGT also glucosylates incompletely assembled multimeric complexes of fully
mature monomers because it recognizes hydrophobic surfaces exposed in the
absence of the appropriate subunits. UGGT is a relatively large, soluble, ER
protein (150–170 kDa) that uses UDP-Glc as sugar donor and requires millimolar
Ca++ concentrations, typically found within the ER lumen. UGGT has at least
two domains. The amino-terminal one, comprising about 80% of the molecule,
recognizes abnormal protein conformers. Bioinformatic analysis predicts that
this domain contains three tandemly repeated, thioredoxin-like domains that
are frequently found in ER proteins involved in protein folding and quality-
control processes. A crystal structure of the third domain showed that it
contains a large hydrophobic patch hidden by a flexible carboxy-terminal
helix. The carboxy-terminal domain has homology with other
glycosyltransferases and is responsible for the catalytic activity.

Together, UGGT and the CNX/CRT complex ensure that only properly folded and
multimerized glycoproteins move from the ER to the Golgi. Unlike GII, the
activity of UGGT does not decrease on reduction of N-glycan Man content. ER
α-mannosidase removal of Man from N-glycans results in longer half-lives of
UGGT reaction products that may be recognized by CNX/CRT. It is possible that
the differential activities of UGGT and GII toward N-glycans with reduced Man
content provides glycoproteins with a last opportunity to achieve proper
folding before proteasomal degradation. The ER folding and quality-control
process is not foolproof, however. Some misfolded proteins escape the ER and
others may misfold after they exit. Thus, there are additional checkpoints to
correct mistakes that occur later in the secretory pathway.

ER-Golgi intermediate compartment 53 (ERGIC53) is a type I membrane protein
that binds to oligomannosyl N-glycans in a Ca++-dependent manner. Its luminal,
carbohydrate-binding domain is similar to those of soluble lectins from
leguminous plants. ERGIC53 cycles between the ER and the ERGIC. The mammalian
protein contains both ER-targeting (dilysine) and ER-exit (diphenylalanine)
determinants at its carboxyl terminus, which bind, respectively, to COPI and
COPII coatomers involved in trafficking between the ER and Golgi. ERGIC53
loads a subset of glycoproteins (coagulation factors V and VIII and cathepsins
C and Z) into COPII-coated vesicles leaving the ER for the Golgi. Mutation of
ERGIC53 causes combined factor V and VIII deficiency, indicating an important
role in secretion of these, and probably other glycoproteins. Vesicular
integral protein 36 (VIP36) is another Golgi lectin that also binds
glycoproteins containing oligomannosyl N-glycans. VIP36 may facilitate
transport of glycoproteins from the ERGIC to _cis_ -Golgi cisternae, or
retrieve glycoproteins bearing N-glycans that did not undergo conversion to
Man5GlcNAc2 by _cis_ -Golgi α-mannosidases IA, IB, and/or IC. Conceivably,
this would provide an opportunity for new rounds of trimming and eventual
formation of complex N-glycans. Both ERGIC53 and VIP36 are up-regulated as
part of the unfolded protein response. Whether other lectins recognizing
specific glycans are involved in post-ER quality control is still an open
question.

Despite the presence of a battery of classical chaperones and the CNX/CRT/UGGT
cycle in the ER, the process of glycoprotein folding is relatively
inefficient, with as much as 80% of some newly made proteins never maturing.
How do cells distinguish between misfolded glycoproteins and folding
intermediates if both entities have almost identical structural features such
as exposed hydrophobic patches? How do cells pull glycoproteins destined for
degradation out from futile reglucosylation–deglucosylation cycles if those
glycoproteins are indeed very efficiently glucosylated by UGGT? How are
terminally misfolded glycoproteins driven to the proteasome for degradation?
The key discriminating factor appears to be the structure of the truncated
N-glycans that result from the relatively long stay of a misfolded
glycoprotein in the ER lumen.

Mammalian cells have, in addition to ER mannosidase I, three additional
homologs called EDEMs (ER degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase-like) proteins,
which initially were thought to be devoid of activity. However, when either ER
mannosidase I or the EDEMs were individually knocked out in human or rabbit
cells, conversion of M9 to M8B ([Figure
39.2](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f2/?report=objectonly)) was mainly
performed by EDEM2, and the contribution of ER mannosidase I to that
particular demannosylation step was minimal. On the other hand, conversion of
M8B to M7 lacking residues i and k (M7BC [Figure
39.1](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f1/?report=objectonly)) was performed by
EDEMs 1 and 3. The M7BC isomer exposes an α1–6Man (residue j, [Figure
39.1](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f1/?report=objectonly)) which is
specifically recognized by an ER lectin (OS9 in mammals and Yos9p in
_Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ ). Like GII, this lectin also contains an MRH
domain that binds N-glycans smaller than M9, including M7BC. OS9/Yos9p forms
part of the complex that translocates misfolded glycoproteins from the ER
lumen to the cytosol (ERAD-L; see below). Both the conversion of M9 to M8B and
the conversion of M8B to M7BC are slow processes in mammalian cells when
compared with deglucosylation reactions. This affords two checkpoints ensuring
that only misfolded glycoproteins, and not folding intermediates, are driven
toward proteasomal degradation after a relatively long ER residence. In yeast,
only an ER α-mannosidase and one EDEM-like protein called Htm1p are present.
The former transforms M9 to M8B very rapidly in practically all glycoproteins,
whereas the latter converts M8B to M7BC slowly, thus affording only one
checkpoint for the exclusive degradation of terminally misfolded
glycoproteins. Htm1p forms a complex with PDI. This oxidoreductase enhances
the mannosidase activity of Htm1p and participates in the recognition of ERAD
substrates. However, not all glycoproteins with N-glycans terminating in
α1–6Man are driven to degradation. For instance, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
acetyl-coenzyme-A reductase, a key ER enzyme in sterol biosynthesis, carries
Man5GlcNAc2 and Man6GlcNAc2 N-glycans that do not target it for degradation
(see below).

Retrotranslocation of misfolded glycoproteins from the ER lumen to the cytosol
for proteasomal degradation ultimately depends on various protein complexes,
some of which contain integral ER membrane proteins. ER membrane proteins with
folding defects in the cytosolic domain are extracted from the ER membrane by
the Doa10 complex via ERAD-C, whereas those in which the folding defect is
present in the luminal (ERAD-L) or membrane (ERAD-M) domains use the Hrd1
complex. Both Doa10p and Hrd1p are integral membrane proteins with E3 ligase
activity in their cytosolic portion. Other proteins in these complexes include
chaperones, proteins with E2 ubiquitin-conjugating activity or proteins that
recognize misfolded proteins. For instance, glycoproteins with N-glycans
containing a terminal α1–6Man are bound by Yos9p and undergo ERAD only if the
N-glycans are in unstructured protein, a feature recognized by Hrd3p in the
Hrd1 complex. Finally, proteins common to both complexes such as yeast Cdc48
(p97 in mammals) are responsible for membrane extraction of misfolded proteins
in an ATP-dependent manner. Although the pore by which ERAD-L substrates are
actually transported to the cytosol has not been identified, it is known that
the substrates must be unfolded in the ER lumen. Although studies on ERAD
complexes have been mainly performed in _S. cerevisiae_ , mammalian cells have
homologs of nearly all proteins described in the yeast complexes.

N-Glycans are removed from unfolded glycoproteins before proteasomal
degradation. A cytoplasmic peptide: N-glycanase (PNGase, N-glycanase, NGLY1)
plays an important role in both removing the glycan and constructing an
efficient predegradation complex ([Figure
39.3](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f3/?report=objectonly)). NGLY1 recognizes
only misfolded or denatured glycoproteins. The enzyme is bound to the
proteasome by subunits S4 and HR23B as a complex with Cdc48, a component of
ERAD complexes. Degradation of the released N-glycan occurs in two stages.
First, cleavage occurs between the two GlcNAcs (chitobiose) in the core of the
N-glycan via a cytoplasmic endo-β- _N_ -acetylglucosaminidase, or possibly a
neutral-pH cytoplasmic chitobiase. A cytoplasmic α-mannosidase cleaves up to
four Man residues to generate Man5GlcNAc (Man b, c, d, e, f, and g in [Figure
39.1](/books/NBK453081/figure/ch39.f1/?report=objectonly)). This glycan is
then taken into the lysosome via an ATP-dependent lysosomal membrane
transporter for final degradation to monosaccharides. Whether these free
glycans have any function in the cytosolic/nuclear compartment before they are
degraded has not been investigated.

Protein O-fucosyltransferases (Ofut1 in Drosophila; POFUT1 and POFUT2 in
mammals) are soluble ER enzymes that O-fucosylate Ser/Thr residues. Ofut1 and
POFUT1 add fucose to epidermal growth factor (EGF)–like repeats, whereas
POFUT2 adds fucose to thrombospondin ([TSR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/thrombospondinrepeatstsr/)) type 1–like repeats ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). EGF and TSR domains are present as tandem repeats
in numerous proteins of multicellular organisms. Ofut1/POFUT1 and POFUT2
selectively fucosylate only properly folded protein domains, suggesting a role
of this glycosylation in folding quality control. Indeed, several POFUT2
targets including ADAMTSL1 and ADAMTSL2 (scaffolding proteins in the
extracellular matrix), ADAMTS9 (a matrix remodeling protease), and ADAMTS13
(the von Willebrand factor cleaving protease) strictly require O-fucosylation
for efficient secretion. Indeed, O-fucosylation appears to stabilize folded
TSRs. The case of Ofut1/POFUT1 is a bit more ambiguous. Studies performed in
Drosophila on the efficiency of cell-surface expression of the Ofut1 substrate
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) showed that Ofut1 is required as
a chaperone for Notch folding and cell-surface expression, and that chaperone
activity is largely independent of the O-fucosyltransferase activity. In
contrast, POFUT1 does not appear to be absolutely required for cell-surface
expression of Notch receptors in all mammalian cells, suggesting that cell-
specific chaperones may be able to compensate for loss of POFUT1 in certain
contexts. It has been reported recently that O-mannosylation in _S.
cerevisiae_ ER might be responsible for terminating futile cycles of
association–dissociation between proteins unable to attain their native
conformation and Kar2p (the budding yeast homolog of mammalian BiP/Grp78
chaperone).

The loss of CNX and CRT in most multicellular organisms causes a severe
phenotype. Mice deficient in CNX reach full term, but half die within 2 days
of birth, and very few survive beyond 3 months. The runts that survive have
obvious motor disorders with loss of large myelinated nerve fibers. CRT-
deficient mice and ERp57-null mice also show embryonic lethality. In contrast,
CNX and CRT null _Caenorhabditis elegans_ mutants are viable. Yeast has CNX or
CNX-like lectins (but not CRT), whereas trypanosomatid protozoa only have CRT.
Another important conserved mammalian ER lectin resident is calmegin,
expressed only in the testes during spermatogenesis. Calmegin shares ∼60%
homology with CNX in mice. Mice deficient in calmegin are nearly sterile
despite producing normal-looking sperm. The sperm are defective in migration
into the oviducts and they do not adhere to the zona pellucida. UGGT is absent
from _S. cerevisiae_ but not from _Schizosaccharomyces pombe_ cells. The
enzyme is not required for the viability of the fission yeast or single
mammalian cells grown under normal conditions. The enzyme is also dispensable
for growth of some multicellular organisms, such as plants. However, loss of
UGGT is embryonically lethal in mice. This fact, as well of the strict
requirement of UGGT for the viability of _S. pombe_ cells only when grown
under severe ER stress conditions, point to a restricted set of glycoproteins
absolutely requiring UGGT for proper folding.

In addition to combined factor V and VIII deficiency caused by ERGIC53
mutations (see above), other congenital diseases result in retention of
defective proteins in the ER and their eventual proteasomal degradation. For
instance, the most common mutation in cystic fibrosis patients, CFTR-ΔF508,
leads to improper folding of this chloride channel and its retention in the
ER. Importantly, the mutation affects CFTR transit to the plasma membrane but
not its transport activity. Similarly, UGGT recognition of a brassinosteroid
receptor mutant triggers retention in the ER of _Arabidopsis thaliana_ cells.
Thus, certain diseases caused by ER retention of defective glycoproteins might
be ameliorated by inhibitors of UGGT activity. One beautiful example of how
the fine sensitivity of UGGT allows modulation of basic physiological
processes is its role during antigen presentation by the major
histocompatibility complex I (MHC I). Here, MHC I complexes loaded with
suboptimal peptides are recognized by UGGT, thus triggering their retention in
the ER. On the contrary, complexes formed with high-affinity peptides are poor
UGGT substrates and are able to be presented on the cell surface. Many
congenital diseases such as lysosomal storage diseases also result in the
accumulation of misfolded glycoproteins in the ER, thus overloading the
folding machinery. An estimated 20%–30% of normal proteins misfold, so it is
not surprising that small differences in the kinetics of conformational
maturation and degradation can tip the balance to ERAD for lack of sufficient
chaperones and other factors that facilitate folding.

Although most glycoproteins transiently associate with CNX/CRT during their
maturation in the ER in vivo, other ER folding and quality-control mechanisms
do the job quite efficiently in cultured cells. However, viral glycoproteins
such as vesicular stomatitis virus G protein, HIV glycoprotein gp120, and M
protein from hepatitis B virus, absolutely require CNX/CRT for proper folding
and exit from the ER. Several viruses use components of the ERAD machinery to
evade immune surveillance in the host. For instance, cytomegalovirus proteins
bind to MHC I complexes and deliver them to E3 ligase complexes that result in
their eventual proteasomal degradation. Similarly, expression of HIV ER
protein Vpu results in the proteasomal degradation of CD4. SV40 and proteins
such as cholera toxin are retrotranslocated to the ER through the secretory
pathway where they use some ERAD components to reach the cytosol where they
produce deleterious effects.

The authors acknowledge contributions to the previous version of this chapter
from Jeffrey D. Esko and Hudson H. Freeze and helpful comments and suggestions
from Robert S. Haltiwanger, Chi-Huang Lin, Marissa Martinez, Patience
Sanderson, and Shadi Toghi Eshghi.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.040

There has been a growing recognition that free glycans are used as signals for
the initiation of a wide variety of biological processes. Such signaling
events are found in development, in defense responses of plants and animals,
and in interactions of organisms with one another. This chapter covers the
current information on this field of study.

[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) signaling systems are diverse.
Sugars (glucose, fructose, and sucrose) may be used by sensing systems, which
are typically linked with the metabolism of the sugar, and form complex webs
of signaling events linked to hormones. Glycan-signaling systems also involve
various glycoconjugates. The addition of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)
to cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins results in changes in the cytoskeleton,
gene transcription, and enzyme activation ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Glycosphingolipids may form lipid rafts, which
act as a platform for sequestering signaling receptors, or can associate with
receptor tyrosine kinases and modulate their activity ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Membrane proteoglycans containing sulfated
glycosaminoglycans, including syndecans, glypicans, and phosphacan may act as
signaling molecules by interacting with kinases or
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate ([Chapters 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)
and [38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). Most plasma membrane signaling receptors,
including receptor tyrosine kinases and G-protein-coupled receptors, contain
N-glycans and O-glycans that modulate their stability and activity ([Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and [10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). Binding of
galectins to these glycans ([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)) or removal of
sialic acids by cell-surface sialidases ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/))
is also thought to modulate signaling. These and other signaling processes are
described elsewhere in this book and are not discussed further here.

There is increasing evidence that low concentrations of specific free glycans
are signals that initiate numerous biological processes. The first evidence
for such signals was obtained during studies of defense responses in plants.
Subsequently, glycan perception and signaling have been shown to be important
in plant and animal development, in innate immunity, and in the initiation of
the nitrogen-fixing _Rhizobium_ –legume symbiosis. The glycans that function
as signals have been identified in many of these processes. In contrast, only
a few of the receptors and the mechanisms of signal transduction have been
identified and characterized.

The plant defense response includes the recognition of the pathogen, changes
in ion flux across the plasma membrane, the formation of reactive oxygen
species, the activation of genes that lead to changes in the plant cell wall,
the production of glycanases that fragment the pathogens cell wall, and the
production of compounds (phytoalexins), which kill the pathogen ([Figure
40.1](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f1/?report=objectonly)). This defense
response often leads to localized cell death in the plant tissue, which is
visible as necrotic spots at the site of infection, and limits the pathogens
spread.

Early studies showed that oligosaccharides, referred to as “oligosaccharins,”
derived from cell wall glycans of the plant or the pathogen elicit numerous
plant defense responses. Oligogalacturonides composed of 1-4-linked α-GalA
residues are one example of oligosaccharins released from plant cell wall
pectin by endopolygalacturonases (EPGs) secreted by the pathogen.
Oligoglucosides composed of 1-3- and 1-6-linked β-Glc are an example of
oligosaccharins released from the pathogens cell wall by plant endo-
glucanases. There is evidence that the plant defense system and the innate
immune system in animals have similarities, most notably where specific
pattern recognition occurs ([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).

Several structurally well-defined oligosaccharides generated from glycans
present in plant and fungal cell walls elicit defense responses at nanomolar
concentrations ([Figure
40.2A](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f2/?report=objectonly)). A single active
hepta-glucoside generated from the cell wall of the soybean pathogen
_Phytophthora megasperma_ was isolated from a mixture of approximately 300
inactive structural isomers of this oligosaccharide. Both the size and
location of the β1-3 branches are important for elicitor activity ([Figure
40.2B](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f2/?report=objectonly)). Elongating the
oligosaccharide at its reducing end had no discernible effect on bioactivity.
Most activity was also retained by removal of a single glucose from the
reducing end. However, the hexa-glucoside was the minimal structure that has
appreciable elicitor activity.

Other glycan elicitors that have been identified are linear homo-oligomers and
include oligogalacturonides, chitosan, and chitin oligosaccharides ([Figure
40.2A](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f2/?report=objectonly)). Initial studies
focused primarily on the degree of polymerization (dp) required for biological
activity. Oligogalacturonides with a dp of 10–14 are biologically active,
whereas dps of >7 and >4 are necessary for the oligochitosans and
oligochitins, respectively. Plants produce polygalacturonase-inhibiting
proteins (PGIP) that inhibit fungal endopolygalacturonases (PGs). This
inhibition likely results in the accumulation in the plant apoplast of
biologically active oligogalacturonides, which elicit numerous defense
responses.

The low quantities and different types of glycan signal molecules that elicit
a defense response suggest that these glycans are recognized by specific
plasma membrane-localized receptors. A high-affinity binding protein for
chitin elicitors has been identified in rice cell plasma membranes and
proposed to be involved in elicitor perception and signal transduction.

Specific cell-surface or membrane-binding sites that are saturable and have
binding specificities similar to those required for biological activity have
been identified in plant cells and isolated plasma membranes. A 75-kDa plasma
membrane protein was identified as a chitin oligosaccharide elicitor-binding
protein (CEBiP) in rice cells. Reducing expression of the _CEBiP_ gene by RNA
interference (RNAi) resulted in suppression of the defense response. Although
CEBiP is a membrane protein, no appreciable portion of the protein is located
on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. A plasma membrane-localized receptor-
like kinase (CERK1), which is required for chitin elicitor signaling in
Arabidopsis, has been identified. Thus, several proteins may be required to
form an elicitor–receptor complex.

The interaction between _Rhizobium_ and the roots of legumes is an
agriculturally and economically important symbiotic relationship because it
enables the plant to fix atmospheric nitrogen. An early step in this process
is the plants recognition of lipooligosaccharide signals (Nod factors), which
are produced by the bacteria ([Figure
40.3](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f3/?report=objectonly)). Nod factors have a
chitin oligosaccharide backbone containing from three to five GlcNAc residues.
However, the types of modifications of this backbone, which include
methylation, acylation (typically with a C16 or C18 fatty acid), acetylation,
carbamylation, sulfation, glycosylation, and the addition of glycerol, differ
among _Rhizobium_ strains.

Nod factors are effective at subnanomolar amounts, are host-specific, and
stimulate numerous changes in the plants root hairs and roots that allow the
bacteria to enter the root cortex and induce the formation of nodules where
nitrogen fixation occurs. The initiation of nodule formation and _Rhizobium_
entry into the root are host strain–specific; this specificity is determined
by the structure of the [Nod factor](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nodfactor/)
produced by a particular _Rhizobium_ strain and the ability of a leguminous
species to recognize that signal.

Genetic and biochemical approaches have been used to identify potential plant
root [Nod factor](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nodfactor/) receptors and
proteins involved in the signaling events. The putative receptors are
transmembrane proteins with a serine/threonine receptor kinase motif on the
cytoplasmic side of the membrane and lysozyme motif (LysM) domains that may
recognize Nod factors on the exterior of the membrane. Two receptors (NFR5 and
NFR1) have been reported to bind Nod factor directly at high-affinity binding
sites, although only limited carbohydrate-binding studies were conducted. A
lectin nucleotide phosphohydrolase (LNP) has been identified in legume roots
and reported to bind Nod factors from _Rhizobium_ symbionts of the plant
species from which it was obtained. LNP is a peripheral membrane protein that
may function in a receptor complex with one or more LysM-type proteins or act
downstream of the Nod factor receptors.

Rhizobium exopolysaccharides (EPS) also have important roles in the
development of nitrogen-fixing root nodules in the legume–rhizobium symbiosis.
A root receptor-like kinase (EPR3) has been identified and shown to have a
role in the recognition of the bacterial EPS. Thus, receptor-mediated
recognition of Nod factors and EPS signals may be involved in plant-bacterial
compatibility and bacterial access to legume roots.

Several glycans have been shown to affect plant growth and plant
organogenesis. Nanomolar concentrations of oligogalacturonides ([Figure
40.2](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f2/?report=objectonly)) with a dp between
12 and 14 induce flower formation but inhibit root formation.
Oligogalacturonides also enhance cell expansion and thereby affect plant
growth and development. Many of these effects may result from the ability of
oligogalacturonides to alter the plants responses to the hormone auxin. Auxin-
induced elongation of pea stem segments is inhibited by nanomolar
concentrations of a nonasaccharide-rich fragment of xyloglucan ([Figure
40.4](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f4/?report=objectonly)).

A family of plant proteins known as wall-associated kinases (WAKs) have been
identified and reported to bind to cell wall pectin and thereby affect plant
cell expansion. WAKs also bind pectin fragments, which may provide the plant
with a mechanism to respond to pathogens and mechanical stresses. Plants may
also use endogenous Nod-factor-like signals to regulate their growth and
development.

[Chitin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/chitin/) oligosaccharides may have a
role in animal embryogenesis. The _Xenopus_ gene _DG42_ encodes a protein with
chitin synthase activity and is transiently expressed in endoderm cells during
the mid-late gastrulation stage ([Chapter 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)).
Homologs of _DG42_ have also been identified in zebrafish and mice. The DG42
protein has sequence homology with the _Rhizobium_ NodC chitin synthase.
Transgenic expression of _DG42_ results in the formation of glycans that are
fragmented by chitinase. _DG42_ is also homologous to a gene encoding a
hyaluronan synthase, and studies suggest that the DG42 protein synthesizes
chitin and hyaluronan, with the former perhaps as an initiation primer for a
single chain ([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). Injection of chitinases or
expression of _NodZ_ (which encodes a fucosyltransferase that can modify
chitin) in animal cells has profound effects on development. Thus, chitin
oligosaccharides are examples of free glycans that act as intracellular
signaling molecules.

The presence of abnormal glycans or the accumulation of glycans in the wrong
place may negatively impact signaling pathways in animal cells. Three prime
repair exonuclease 1 (TREX1) is an ER-associated negative regulator of innate
immunity. Mutations that affect TREX1 function are associated with numerous
autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). The ER-localized carboxyl terminus of TREX1 has
been proposed to interact with, and stabilize, the catalytic activity of the
ER oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex and thereby suppress immune
activation. The OST complex becomes dysfunctional in the presence of carboxy-
terminal truncated TREX1. This leads to the release of free glycans from
dolichol-linked oligosaccharides, which has been hypothesized to lead to the
activation of genes with immune system-related functions and the production of
autoantibodies. Thus, TREX1 may safeguard the cell against free glycan buildup
in the ER and thereby prevent glycan and glycosylation defects that can lead
to immune disorders.

N-linked glycans have a role in the correct folding of glycoproteins in the
ER. Misfolded glycoproteins are targeted for degradation by an ER-associated
degradation (ERAD) process in which they are retrotranslocated into the
cytosol ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). The glycans are then released
from the glycoprotein by the N-glycanase NGLY1. The protein is degraded by the
proteasome, whereas the released glycans are likely partially de-mannosylated
in the cytosol and then transported to the lysosomes by an as yet unidentified
oligosaccharide transporter. It is not known if these free glycans have any
signaling functions in the cytosolic/nuclear compartment. In the lysosome,
glycosidases hydrolyze the glycans into monomeric sugars that can then be
reused by the cell. Mutations that disrupt NGLY1 function may cause severe
health problems in humans. Studies with _Ngly1_ mutant mice cells suggest that
in the absence of NGLY1, ERAD becomes dysfunctional because a cytosolic endo-
β-N-acetylglucosaminidase generates proteins that contain only a single Asn-
linked GlcNAc instead of completely deglycosylated proteins. The accumulation
of these GlcNAc-proteins may result in the formation of aggregates that are
harmful to the cell or they may interfere with intracellular signaling
processes.

[Glycosaminoglycans](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosaminoglycans/) (GAGs)
are signaling glycans because they interact with receptor tyrosine kinases
and/or their ligands and facilitate changes in cell behavior ([Chapters
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/), [16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/), and
[35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). [Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/hyaluronan/) oligosaccharides bind to specific membrane proteins,
including CD44. In some cells, this binding leads to clustering of CD44, which
activates kinases such as c-Src and focal adhesion kinase (FAK).
Phosphorylation alters the interaction of the cytoplasmic tail of CD44 with
regulatory and adaptor molecules that modulate cytoskeletal
assembly/disassembly and cell survival and proliferation ([Figure
40.5](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f5/?report=objectonly)). Signaling by
hyaluronan oligosaccharides depends on the dp of the glycans. Low-molecular-
weight glycans are more active in triggering danger responses via binding to
Toll-like receptor's (TLR's) responses.

In contrast to hyaluronan-dependent signal transduction, signaling via
sulfated GAGs (heparan sulfate [HS] and chondroitin/dermatan sulfate) occurs
by an indirect mechanism. Indeed, few membrane receptors have been described
in which sulfated GAGs binding causes a specific downstream response, such as
phosphorylation of the receptor or activation of a kinase. Instead, sulfated
GAGs bind to many ligand/receptor pairs, thereby lowering the effective
concentration of ligand required to engage the receptor or increasing the
duration of the response. An example of this is the ability of exogenous
heparin or endogenous HS proteoglycans to activate fibroblast growth factor
(FGF) receptors by FGF ([Chapter 38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). No substantial
conformational change in the ligand occurs on binding to sulfated GAG,
consistent with the idea that the glycan primarily aids in the juxtaposition
of components of the signal transduction pathway. Free HS oligosaccharides can
be released by the action of secreted heparanase. These glycans may facilitate
signaling through the mechanism described above or by the release of growth
factors from stored depots in the extracellular matrix. Sulfated GAGs also
facilitate the formation of morphogen gradients in tissues during early
development. Because the gradient determines cell specification during
development, the glycan indirectly affects signaling responses in receptive
cells. These examples do not exclude the possibility that sulfated
glycosaminoglycans may act as ligands and induce signaling directly (e.g., by
ligating receptors).

In addition to mucins ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)), the innate immune
system developed early in eukaryote evolution is a first line of defense
against infection by microorganisms. A key feature of this system is its
ability to distinguish self from infectious nonself. In more advanced
eukaryotes, this is accomplished by receptors that recognize conserved
molecular patterns specific to the pathogens. Many of these pathogen-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) are glycans located on the surfaces of
the microorganism. The glycans include the lipopolysaccharides (LPS) of Gram-
negative bacteria, the peptidoglycans and techoic acids of Gram-positive
bacteria ([Chapters 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) and
[22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)) and the mannans of fungi. The cognate receptors
on the host cells are referred to as pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs).
Numerous PRRs are present in mammals that recognize diverse PAMPs and induce
host-defense pathways, including TLRs and mannan-binding lectin ([Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Binding of PAMPs to TLRs activates various
signaling pathways that induce inflammation and antimicrobial effector
responses. Some TLRs are present on antigen-presenting cells and help to
activate the adaptive immune response. TLRs also respond to tissue injury via
binding of released HA fragments as damage-associated molecular patterns
(DAMPs).

One of the best-studied models of innate immunity involves the LPS of Gram-
negative bacteria, which has a role in causing septic shock (see [Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Lipid A (endotoxin) is the glucosamine-based
phospholipid anchor of LPS responsible for activating the innate immune
system. Lipid A is an excellent PAMP as its structure is highly conserved
among Gram-negative bacteria. Picomolar amounts of Lipid A are detected by
TLR-4 ([Figure 40.5](/books/NBK453024/figure/ch40.f5/?report=objectonly)). The
LPS is first opsonized and complexed with another host cell-surface protein,
CD14. The binding of LPS leads to recruitment of the adaptor proteins MyD88
and IRAK. This complex initiates a signaling cascade of phosphorylation events
that ultimately lead to the transcription of proinflammatory genes.

In contrast to PAMPs and DAMPs, inhibitory Siglec receptors ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)) on innate immune cells recognize endogenous
sialylated glyconjugates as self-associated molecular patterns (SAMPs), and
dampen unwanted reactions against the host. Details of the sialoglycan
specificity involved require further investigation, but pathogens take
advantage of the system via molecular mimicry ([Chapters
7](/books/n/glyco3/ch7/) and [42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).

The examples given in this chapter indicate the diversity of glycan structures
that can function as signaling molecules. It is likely that further examples
of glycan signals in both plant and animal cells, as well as in their
interactions with microbes, will become apparent in the future.

The authors appreciate the helpful comments and suggestions from Ryan Porell,
Chengcheng Huang, Nickita Mehta, and Daniela Janevska Carroll.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.041

Glycans have numerous physiological functions. This brief chapter will guide
readers to focus on glycans in normal organ system functions, mostly in
vertebrates. Pathological aspects of glycan biosynthesis and degradation are
discussed elsewhere. Given the breadth of physiological functions of glycans,
the individual sections indicate just a few representative examples, and
listings are necessarily incomplete.

Glycans and glycan-binding proteins are important for both male and female
reproductive function. Studies in sea urchins, fish, frogs, and mammals have
shown that glycans are involved in many specific steps during fertilization
([Chapter 27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)). [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycan/) recognition occurs during sperm interactions with reproductive
tract mucins of animals with internal fertilization mechanisms, in the lining
of the fallopian tubes, and during implantation of the early embryo.
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/)-deficient male
mice are sometimes infertile or subfertile. Following birth in mammals,
lactation generates a rich mixture of biologically important glycoconjugates,
especially the milk oligosaccharides, a unique class of free secreted glycans
that vary greatly in complexity and diversity among species ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)).

Genetic modifications that eliminate initial steps of major glycan synthetic
pathways and of some monosaccharide biosynthetic pathways generally result in
embryonic lethality, in most but not all taxa. One exception is the mucin
[O-GalNAc glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ogalnacglycan/), as there are
20 different polypeptide:O-GalNAc transferases ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). It is not yet clear if any members of this gene
family are nonredundant in mammalian development; however, in Drosophila,
elimination of certain O-GalNAc transferases is lethal. Overall, the embryonic
phenotypes of lethal defects in glycan biosynthesis are complex and cannot be
explained by a single mechanism. For example, disruption of protein
O-fucosylation causes a defect in global [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/notch/) receptor signaling leading to embryonic lethality ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). Conversely, loss of modifications of terminal
structures on glycans usually does not have an embryonic lethal outcome, but
viable offspring show more specific defects in restricted cell types.
Elimination of glycosaminoglycans also causes developmental abnormalities,
most likely because of their roles in modulating growth factor function and in
setting up morphogen gradients ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Although
the elimination of glycosaminoglycans causes systemic developmental
abnormalities, elimination of some proteoglycan core proteins that carry these
glycans can have tissue-specific consequences (Chapters 17, 25, and 26).

Glycans affect the functions of all classes of blood cells. Many blood group
antigens on erythrocytes are glycans, and successful blood transfusion
requires compatibility of these antigens between donor and recipient ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). [Selectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/selectin/) ligands and their receptors ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)) play critical roles in trafficking of leukocytes
from the bloodstream into tissues. Nearly all proteins in plasma are
N-glycosylated, a feature that is critical for maintaining stability in the
circulation, as well as optimal function. Thus, patients with defects in
N-glycosylation often have insufficient levels of coagulation factors such as
antithrombin III and proteins C and S, because of accelerated clearance of
these proteins from the circulation ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). The
O-fucose glycans on [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) receptors
regulate hematopoiesis and the hematopoietic stem cell niche ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)).

In addition to controlling tissue trafficking of lymphocytes and monocytes, N-
and O-glycans control differentiation, adhesion, and survival of these cells
([Chapters 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/) and [45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).
Signaling in leukocytes is also regulated by
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/), which recognize sialic
acid–containing ligands as “self-associated molecular patterns” (SAMPs,
[Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)), and O-fucose glycans on
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) receptors regulate many cell
differentiation processes, including development of T cells in the thymus
([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)). [Galectins](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/galectins/) ([Chapter 36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)) play key roles in
immune cell activation and function, as do C-type lectins on antigen
presenting cells ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Glycans are critical
components of many antigens and may determine how epitopes are presented
(e.g., presentation of glycolipid antigens by CD1a-positive lymphocytes).
There is a large and complex literature about the multiple roles of N-glycans
on the IgG Fc domain, in modulating antibody effector functions.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) has a critical role in
the development of the heart ([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)), and
glycosaminoglycans modulate angiogenesis, in part because they bind growth
factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor and fibroblast growth
factor ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). The structural integrity of the
walls of blood vessels is thought to depend on glycans, including a high
density of sialic acids at the luminal surface of endothelial cells, as well
as glycosaminoglycans within the basement membrane underlying the endothelial
cells. Cardiac muscle integrity and optimal physiology depend on various
glycans.

Epithelial cells in the upper and lower airways synthesize a dense and complex
array of glycans on their luminal surface. Structural glycoproteins,
glycolipids, and secreted mucin molecules form barriers that maintain
hydration of the epithelial surfaces, and protect against physical and
microbial invasion. Embryonic stem cells lacking complex N-glycans cannot
properly organize the bronchial epithelium. N-glycans are also important for
healthy lung function, as mice lacking the core α1-6 fucose of N-glycans
develop emphysema-like symptoms caused by overexpression of matrix
metalloproteinases that degrade the lung tissue; this may result from aberrant
transforming growth factor-β1 signaling through its misglycosylated receptor.
Gene knockouts of individual mucin polypeptides reveal diverse overlapping
functions. Mice lacking O-fucose glycans in the lung do not generate secretory
cells necessary for airway development.

O-GlcNAc on proteins of the nucleus and cytoplasm modulates insulin action,
and aberrant [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/)
is involved in many of the effects of hyperglycemia ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). N-glycans also play a role in type II diabetes,
as mice that cannot synthesize triantennary N-glycans develop diabetes when
fed a high-fat diet. This deficiency alters the single N-glycan on the GLUT2
glucose transporter on pancreatic islet cells, leading to accelerated
endocytosis, depletion from the cell surface, and poor response to insulin.
N-glycans are critical for the production of functional thyroid hormones, as
targeting and uptake of thyroglobulin that is converted to T3 and T4 in the
thyroid gland may require Man-6-P-containing glycans on thyroglobulin
([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). The plasma half-life of several
pituitary glycoprotein hormones is regulated by the presence of N-glycans that
contain an unusual sulfated GalNAc ([Chapters 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/) and
[31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)), which controls hormone clearance in the liver.

[Glycosaminoglycans](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosaminoglycans/)
([Chapters 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/) and [17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) play
critical roles in the development, organization, and structure of both the
gums and teeth. Interactions of various oral commensal organisms with the host
epithelium and with one another often involve glycan recognition. Mucins
produced by the salivary glands may have protective effects in the oral
cavity, preventing bacterial biofilm formation on teeth ([Chapters
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/) and [42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). However, mucin
sialoglycans also provide binding sites for tooth cavity–facilitating
bacteria. Glycoproteomic analysis of saliva may be useful to identify disease
biomarkers.

The gastrointestinal system has to live in equilibrium with the microbial
contents of the gut. Extensive “glycan foraging” by various organisms occurs
in the gastrointestinal tract, as part of the complex relationship of the
microbiome with the host ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Glycans are
critical for providing physical protection against luminal contents of the gut
and organize the mucin barrier that lines the gut. Glycans on the epithelial
surface interact with both symbionts and pathogens, ranging from
_Helicobacter_ species in the stomach to anaerobic bacteria in the colon
([Chapters 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/) and [42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).
_Helicobactor pylori_ infection is rarely found in the duodenum, where unusual
GlcNAcα1-4-terminated O-linked mucins are expressed; this glycan apparently
acts as an antimicrobial to control _H. pylori_ infection. Heparan sulfate in
the intestinal basement membrane also serves a crucial role as a permeability
barrier, preventing protein loss from the plasma into the gut. O-fucose
glycans in the small intestine regulate the balance of secretory and goblet
cells necessary for intestinal development.

The liver synthesizes a large fraction of plasma proteins, and nearly all
proteins secreted by the liver are heavily N-glycosylated, making hepatocytes
a traditional cell type for studying the organization and function of the
Golgi apparatus. Both hepatocytes and Kupffer cells in the liver have specific
glycan-based recognition systems to clear unwanted circulating molecules (see
[Chapters 28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/), [31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/),
[32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/), and [34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/) for examples of
liver receptor specificities). Heparan sulfate proteoglycans in the space of
Disse between fenestrated endothelium and hepatocytes bind lipoproteins and
aid in their clearance.

Heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) and
sialic acid residues ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) on podocalyxin are
involved in assuring the optimal filtering function of the glomerular basement
membrane. In addition, reduced branching of complex N-glycans causes kidney
pathology that may result from an autoimmune response. As in the pulmonary and
gastrointestinal tracts, mucins with O-GalNAc glycans ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) and proteoglycans with glycosaminoglycans provide
a barrier function at the luminal surfaces of the ureters and bladder.

Glucosylceramide and related glycosphingolipids appear to have a critical role
in maintaining the barrier function of the skin. [Dermatan
sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/dermatansulfate/) helps maintain the
structure of the dermis and participates in wound repair.

Proper adhesion of skeletal muscle to extracellular matrix laminin requires
unique O-mannose glycans on the sarcolemmal glycoprotein α-dystroglycan
([Chapter 27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)). Various defects in this pathway cause
mild to severe muscular dystrophies in both humans and mice ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycan/)-related interactions can promote clustering of acetylcholine
receptors at neuromuscular junctions. Sialic acid–containing glycans are found
on many ion transport proteins, and loss of these glycans impairs functions
such as modulation of calcium fluxes into skeletal muscle cells. Normal
formation and ossification of cartilage into bone requires many
glycosaminoglycans, including hyaluronan and heparan, chondroitin, and keratan
sulfates ([Chapters 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/) and
[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).

The central nervous system has the highest amount and concentration of sialic
acid–containing glycolipids (gangliosides; [Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)), and alterations in these glycans affect
neurological function. [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/oglcnacylation/) in specific cells of the brain sense nutrients and
regulate satiety. The unusual polysialic acid chains on NCAM (neural cell
adhesion molecule) differentially modulate the plasticity of the nervous
system during embryogenesis ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). The
dystroglycanopathies mentioned above also typically have cognitive and/or
neurologic defects in addition to muscle dysfunction ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)). There are additional instances wherein specific
glycans appear to inhibit nerve regeneration after injury. Recognition of
certain sialylated glycolipids by myelin-associated glycoprotein appears to
send a negative signal to restrain neuronal sprouting following injury
([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)), and similar inhibitory effects may be
mediated by the glycosaminoglycan chondroitin sulfate ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). In both instances, targeted degradation of the
glycan in vivo (by local injection of sialidase or chondroitinase,
respectively) can stimulate neuronal growth and repair, supporting the
hypothesis that these glycans normally act to block neuronal regeneration.
Genetic defects in mutant mice provide evidence that complex N-glycans and
glycosaminoglycans have critical roles in the development and organization of
the nervous system ([Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and
[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Fucosylated N-glycans appear to play a role in
modulating various aspects of neural development and function. The great
majority of patients with inherited glycosylation disorders also have
cognitive and/or neurological abnormalities, but specific mechanisms are
mostly unknown ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Victor Vacquier and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Aime
Lopez Aguilar, Daniela Janevska Carroll, Ryan Porell, and Eathen Ryan.

A wide range of topics are covered here and only a few references can be
given. Please also see the citations at the ends of individual chapters
referred to above.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.042

This chapter illustrates and discusses some key mechanisms by which glycans
influence the pathogenesis and progession of bacterial and viral infections
and describes examples of opportunities for therapeutic intervention.

Infectious diseases remain a major cause of death, disability, and social and
economic disorder for millions of people throughout the world. Poverty, poor
access to health care, human migration, emerging disease agents, and
antibiotic resistance all contribute to the expanding impact of these
illnesses. Prevention and treatment strategies for infectious diseases are
derived from a thorough understanding of the complex interactions between
specific viral or bacterial pathogens and the human (or animal) host.

Just as glycans are major components of the outermost surface of all animal
and plant cells, so too are oligosaccharides and polysaccharides found on the
surfaces of all bacteria and viruses of eukaryotes. Thus, most (if not all)
interactions of microbial pathogens with their hosts are influenced to an
important degree by the pattern of glycans and glycan-binding receptors that
each expresses. This holds true at all stages of infection, from initial
colonization of host epithelial surfaces, to tissue spread, to the induction
of inflammation or host-cell injury that results in clinical symptoms. The
microbial molecules most responsible for disease manifestations are known as
virulence factors.

A human in good health is colonized by as many as 1013 bacteria on the skin
and mucosal surfaces, particularly in the gastrointestinal tract, a number
that equals the number of cells in our own body. Despite all these direct
encounters, only a handful of bacterial species are known to spread into the
body to produce serious infections. Although not restricted to pathogenic
species, one feature that most of these disease-causing agents share in common
is the presence of a polysaccharide capsule that covers the bacterial surface
([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). [Capsule](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/capsule/) expression by the bacteria poses a particular challenge to
immune detection and clearance.

Effective killing of bacteria by phagocytes, such as neutrophils or
macrophages, requires opsonization, a process in which the bacterial surface
is tagged with complement proteins or specific antibodies. Phagocytes express
receptors for activated complement or antibody Fc domains, which allow host
defense cells to bind, engulf, and kill the bacteria. Anionic host mimics,
such as sialic acid present in bacterial surface capsules like those of the
neonatal pathogens, group B streptococcus (GBS), and _Escherichia coli_ K1,
can bind the host regulatory protein factor H, thereby attenuating the
activity of the alternative complement pathway. Through their surface
polysaccharide capsules, bacteria also cloak protein structures on their
surfaces to which antibodies might be directed.

Generally, humans can generate good antibody responses against nonsialylated
bacterial polysaccharide capsules, but this ability is diminished early and
late in life, so that infants and the elderly are particularly prone to
invasive infection with encapsulated pathogens. Certain bacteria avoid
antibody defenses through molecular mimicry of common host glycan structures,
masquerading as “self” to avoid immune recognition. An example is the leading
pathogen, group A streptococcus (GAS), which expresses a nonimmunogenic
capsule of hyaluronan, identical to the nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan that is
highly abundant in host skin and cartilage ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). The contribution of capsule-based host mimicry to
bacterial immune evasion is also well illustrated by the homopolymeric sialic
acid capsules of _Neisseria meningitidis_ (meningococcus), an important cause
of sepsis and meningitis. Whereas the group C meningococcal capsule is
composed of an α2-9-linked sialic acid polymer that is a unique bacterial
structure, the group B meningococcal capsule is composed of an α2-8-linked
sialic acid polymer that is identical to a motif present on neural cell
adhesion molecules (NCAMs) found in human neural tissues ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). The group C capsule has proven to be a successful
vaccine antigen in human populations, whereas the group B capsule is
essentially nonimmunogenic.

Another challenge posed to host immunity by certain pathogens is the great
diversity of capsular structures, which is reflected in the different
compositions and linkages of repeating sugar units that are produced by
different strains of the same bacterial species. Often, these structures are
immunologically distinct, allowing classification of different capsule
“serotype” strains; for example, there are five major capsule serotypes of
meningococcus (A, B, C, Y, and W-135), six different capsule serotypes of the
respiratory pathogen _Haemophilus influenzae_ (a–f), nine capsule serotypes of
GBS (Ia, Ib, and II–VIII), and more than 90 different serotypes of
_Streptococcus pneumoniae_ (pneumococcus), which is a leading cause of
bacterial pneumonia, sepsis, and meningitis. Antibodies generated by the host
against the capsule of one serotype strain typically do not provide cross-
protective immunity. Thus, individuals can be repeatedly infected over their
lifetime by different serotypes of the same bacterial pathogen. Figuratively,
although the strategy of capsular molecular mimicry used for example by GAS
renders the pathogen invisible to immune surveillance, the strategy of
antigenic diversity of capsule types presents a moving target to the immune
system. Genetic exchange of capsule biosynthetic genes among serotype strains
of an individual species (e.g., the polysialyltransferase gene of
meningococcus) can lead to capsule switching in vivo, which provides another
means of pathogen escape from protective immunity.

The key role of the capsule in the virulence of multiple bacterial pathogens
has been shown through genetic mutagenesis of capsule biosynthesis genes and
infectious challenge in small animal models of disease. Compared with the
wild-type parent bacterial strains, isogenic capsule-deficient mutants of GAS,
GBS, pneumococcus, _H. influenzae_ , meningococcus, _Salmonella typhi_
(typhoid fever), _Bacillus anthracis_ (anthrax), and several other important
human pathogens are rapidly cleared from the bloodstream by opsonophagocytosis
and they are unable to establish systemic infections. Perhaps the most
historically significant bacterial virulence factor of all is the pneumococcal
capsule. Pioneering experiments by Frederick Griffith in 1928 showed the
transfer of disease-causing capacity of virulent, encapsulated (smooth)
strains to nonvirulent, nonencapsulated (rough) strains. Studies regarding
immunogenicity of pneumococcal polysaccharides ([Figure
42.1](/books/NBK453060/figure/ch42.f1/?report=objectonly)) provided the
framework for the discoveries of Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn
McCarty, which showed DNA to be the carrier of genetic information.

In addition to a polysaccharide capsule, Gram-negative bacteria have an outer
membrane that is rich in lipopolysaccharide (LPS; [Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). LPS contains a lipid A moiety (comprised of two
glucosamines, acyl chains and phosphates), which is embedded in the outer
membrane, and two additional glycan components that extend outward: a core
oligosaccharide containing sugars not found in vertebrates (such as
ketodeoxyoctulonate [Kdo] and heptose) and a repeating polysaccharide known as
the O-antigen that can vary among strains within an individual species. Many
mucosal pathogens such as _H. influenzae_ , _Campylobacter jejuni_ , and
_Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ lack O-antigens; instead, they produce
lipooligosaccharides (LOSs) that contain only lipid A and an extended core
structure.

LPS is a pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) that is recognized by
the innate immune system and stimulates inflammatory responses to clear
bacteria that have breeched the barrier defenses of the skin or mucosal
epithelium. Soluble LPS released by invading bacteria, and particularly its
lipid A component, interacts with the opsonic receptor CD14 and the membrane
protein Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) to initiate distinct immune signaling
processes ([Figure 42.2](/books/NBK453060/figure/ch42.f2/?report=objectonly)).
TLR4 belongs to an evolutionarily conserved family of receptors (TLRs) that
can distinguish closely related microbe-derived ligands. For example, the TLR2
receptor can recognize peptidoglycan or lipoteichoic acid derived from the
cell walls of Gram-positive bacteria that generally lack LPS. A signaling
cascade ultimately leads to the activation of the transcription factor nuclear
factor-κB (NF-κB) and its translocation to the nucleus, where it positively
regulates the promoters for genes encoding several proinflammatory cytokines,
including tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and Interleukin-1 (IL-1).

Although TLR-mediated detection of LPS and other microbial molecules is a
critical element in triggering host innate immunity, a dangerous condition
known as sepsis can develop in the setting of overwhelming bacterial
infections that lead to dysregulated immune responses. Symptoms include fever,
low blood pressure, rapid heart rate, abnormal white blood cell counts, and
dysfunction of multiple organ systems that may lead to lung or kidney failure
and death.

Many Gram-negative bacteria vary or modify their LPS to interfere with host
immune defense mechanisms. For example, by incorporating modifications such as
phosphoethanolamine that can now be attached through plasmid-mediated
transferases to confer resistance to polymixins or 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose
(L-Ara4N) that reduce the overall negative charge of LPS, bacteria can repel
cationic host antimicrobial peptides, including defensins, away from their
cell wall target of action. The plague bacillus _Yersinia pestis_ changes the
number and type of acyl groups on the lipid A of its LPS in response to
temperature changes. At environmental temperatures (∼21°C), _Y. pestis_
expresses predominantly hexa-acylated lipid A, whereas at the body temperature
of the mammalian host (37°C), the pathogen expresses mostly tetra-acylated
lipid A. The more complex hexa-acylated version of the LPS strongly induces
cytokine release from host cells, which suggests that the production of a less
immunostimulatory form of LPS on entry into the mammalian host might represent
a virulence mechanism to avoid immune detection.

The foodborne pathogen, _C. jejuni_ , is capable of expressing variable
sialylated LOS structures that mimic human gangliosides ([Chapters
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/) and [46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/)). In most
instances, the LOS structures allow the pathogen to evade the immune system.
In a small number of cases, however, self-tolerance is overcome and the host
recognizes these antigens as foreign, mounting an immune response against the
LOS. These self-reacting antibodies then bind to host gangliosides on nerve
fibers, which results in a paralytic disorder known as Guillain–Barré syndrome
(GBS). For most patients, GBS symptoms can be managed by removing cross-
reactive antibodies (plasmapheresis) or immunomodulatory therapies such as
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg).

Adherence to skin or mucosal surfaces is a fundamental characteristic of the
normal human microflora and also an essential first step in the pathogenesis
of many important infectious diseases ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).
Most microorganisms express more than one type of adherence factor or
“adhesin.” A large fraction of microbial adhesins are lectins that bind
directly to cell-surface glycoproteins, glycosphingolipids, or
glycosaminoglycans; adhesion may be mediated through terminal sugars or
internal carbohydrate motifs. In other cases, the bacteria express adhesins
that bind matrix glycoproteins (e.g., fibronectin, collagen, or laminin) or
mucin, mediating attachment to the mucosal surface. The specific carbohydrate
ligands for bacterial attachment on the animal cell are often referred to as
adhesin receptors and they are quite diverse in nature. The tropism of
individual bacteria for particular host tissues (e.g., skin vs. respiratory
tract vs. gastrointestinal tract) is effectively determined by the array of
available adhesin-receptor pairs.

In a number of cases, the key adhesive factor is an assembly of protein
subunits that project from the bacterial surface in hair-like threads known as
pili or fimbriae ([Figure
42.3A](/books/NBK453060/figure/ch42.f3/?report=objectonly)). Such pili are
usually composed of a repeating structural subunit providing extension and a
different “tip adhesin” responsible for binding to the host cell. The
structural proteins for pilus assembly are often encoded in a bacterial
operon. Lateral mobility of pili structures in the bacterial membrane provides
a Velcro-like binding effect to epithelial surfaces. Certain strains of _E.
coli_ express pili that bind avidly to P-blood group-related
glycosphingolipids in the bladder epithelium, leading to urinary tract
infection. Pathogenic strains of _Salmonella_ produce pili that facilitate
adherence to human intestinal cell mucosa, thereby causing food poisoning and
infectious diarrhea. In other cases, a surface-anchored protein (afimbrial
adhesin) expressed by the bacteria represents a critical colonization factor
([Figure 42.3B](/books/NBK453060/figure/ch42.f3/?report=objectonly)). For
example, the filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA) of _Bordetella pertussis_
promotes strong attachment of the bacteria to the ciliated epithelial cells of
the bronchi and trachea, triggering local inflammation and tissue injury that
results in the “whooping cough” disease. FHA is a component of modern
pertussis vaccines given in infancy and early childhood to block infection.

Adhesins can be glycoproteins as well. In _Pasteurellaceae_ and some _H.
influenzae_ species, adhesins are N-glucosylated by a cytoplasmic
N-glucosylation system that is homologous to the cytoplasmic O-GlcNAc
transferase of eukaryotes. Similarly, transfer of heptose residues by the
dodecameric bacterial autotransporter heptosyltransferase (BAHT) family of
enzymes to autotransporter adhesins in several different Gram-negative
pathogens is essential for the adhesion process.

[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/)–lectin interactions play
pivotal roles in enabling certain pathogens to penetrate or invade through
epithelial barriers, whereupon they may disseminate through the bloodstream to
produce deep-seated infections. _Salmonella enterica_ serovar Typhi causes
typhoid fever in humans, a process that begins with intracellular invasion of
intestinal epithelial cells. The outer core oligosaccharide structure of the
LPS is required for internalization in epithelial cells. Removal of a key
terminal sugar residue on the outer core markedly reduces the efficiency of
bacterial uptake. Once invasion has occurred, the secreted A2B5 typhoid toxin
mediates illness by first binding preferentially to the sialic acid Neu5Ac,
which is enriched in humans. _Streptococcus pyogenes_ , the common cause of
strep throat but also an agent of serious invasive infections, attaches to
human pharyngeal and skin epithelial cells through specific recognition of its
hyaluronan capsular polysaccharide by the hyaluronan-binding protein CD44
([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). This binding process induces marked
cytoskeletal rearrangements manifested by membrane ruffling and opening of
intercellular junctions that allow tissue penetration by GAS through a
paracellular route.

Bacterial glycosylation systems are also involved in the manipulation of the
host response: for example, injection of the NleB glycosyltransferase by
enteropathogenic _E. coli_ (EPEC) results in the N-GlcNAc modification of
arginine residues of host defense proteins, whereas the injected GlcNAc
transferase PaTox of _Photorhabdus asymbiotica_ modifies the host Rho GTPase
at tyrosine residues.

[Biofilm](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/biofilm/) formation is a mechanism that
promotes bacterial attachment to host surfaces, often in the form of a
polymicrobial community. For example, oral biofilms comprise, in total,
approximately 1000 species, only one-half of which are culturable, and the
remaining species can only be identified by nucleic acid detection methods.
_Streptococcus_ species predominate (60%–90%), but _Eikenella_ , _Haemophilus_
, _Prevotella_ , and _Priopionibacterium_ species can also be found
abundantly. Dental plaque represents an oral biofilm in which dense, mushroom-
like clumps of bacteria pop up from the surface of the tooth enamel,
interspersed with bacteria-free channels filled with nucleic acids, proteins,
lipids, and extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) produced by the bacteria that
can serve as diffusion channels ([Figure
42.4](/books/NBK453060/figure/ch42.f4/?report=objectonly)). Bacteria within
biofilms communicate with one another through soluble signaling molecules in a
process known as “quorum sensing” to optimize gene expression for survival. In
biofilms, bacteria live under nutrient limitation and in a dormant state in
which defense molecules (e.g., antimicrobial peptides) produced by the immune
system and pharmacologic antibiotics are less effective. Moreover, the EPS
matrix can bind and inactivate these same agents, contributing to the
persistence of the biofilm and difficulty in medical treatment of biofilm
infections, such as those that arise on catheters and other medical devices.

The EPS synthesized by bacteria in biofilms varies greatly in their
composition and in their chemical and physical properties. Many EPS types are
polyanionic because of the presence of either uronic acids (D-glucuronic,
D-galacturonic, or D-mannuronic acids) or ketal-linked pyruvate. Inorganic
residues, such as phosphate or sulfate, also contribute to the negative charge
and modifications such as O-acetylation or sugar epimerization further
contribute to EPS complexity.

In several cases, EPS is a homoglycan composed of β-1,6-linked _N_
-acetylglucosamine residues known as poly- _N_ -acetylglucosamine (or PNAG),
as exemplified by the adhesive polymer obtained from _Staphylococcus
epidermidis_ strains that produce biofilms on catheters. PNAG is common among
many oral pathogens and multidrug-resistant bacteria resulting in concerted
efforts to target this polymer, especially because antibodies raised against
the deacetylated form of PNAG mediate opsonic killing. Interestingly, the
periodontal pathogen _Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans_ secretes a PNAG
hydrolase known as dispersin B (DspB) that has been shown to effectively
disperse biofilms formed by PNAG-producing bacteria and is therefore also
being developed as an adjuvant to antibiotic therapy.

Viruses bind to host cells as a prerequisite for entry and intracellular
replication. Because cell surfaces are especially enriched in glycans,
numerous viruses target glycans for cell attachment and entry. Virus–glycan
interactions are often responsible for species and tissue tropism (Table
37.1), as illustrated here with examples of three human pathogens: influenza
virus, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
showing different modes of glycan-mediated viral interactions ([Figure
42.5](/books/NBK453060/figure/ch42.f5/?report=objectonly)). Influenza virus
uses a sialic acid–binding protein for viral binding and entry. HSV-1 has
multiple envelope proteins that bind to heparan sulfate as the first step in
recruitment of a multiprotein virus entry complex. HIV expresses glycans on
its surface that co-opt host lectins to enhance cell dissemination.

Influenza viruses are common human pathogens of the upper respiratory tract.
Seasonal epidemics result in hundreds of thousands of deaths annually, with
occasional, much more deadly pandemics. Influenza gains entry into cells of
the human upper airway by binding to glycans terminated with α2-6-linked
sialic acid (preferentially the human enriched one, Neu5Ac) ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). The entry process is mediated by influenza
hemagglutinin, named for the method of its discovery. When first isolated in
the 1930s, influenza was found to cause clumping (agglutination) of human red
blood cells in vitro. Upon continued incubation, the red cells disaggregated
and were not re-agglutinated by fresh virus. It was hypothesized that a
“receptor destroying enzyme” was responsible. Isolation of the virus-released
receptor revealed sialic acid that had been released by a sialidase, also
called viral neuraminidase. The familiar numbering system H1N1 represents
hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N; technically a sialidase).

The life cycle of influenza starts with binding of the viral hemagglutinin to
cell-surface sialic acids followed by hemagglutinin-mediated fusion with the
host cell membrane, release of the virions intracellularly, replication, and
then budding of newly assembled virions from the host cell surface. To
disseminate to new cells, newly budded virus disengage from the cell surface
and viral envelope sialic acids using the viral neuraminidase. The
hemagglutinin directs species and tissue tropism, whereas the neuraminidase is
essential for propagation of the infection.

Emergence of new human influenza strains occurs via transmission from other
animal species, especially poultry, and a key to species tropism is sialic
acid linkage. [Glycan array](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycanarray/)
screening revealed that avian influenza binds to glycans terminated with α2-3
Neu5Ac, whereas human isolates bind to glycans terminated with α2-6 Neu5Ac.
Neu5Ac in α2-3 linkage is common in the intestinal tracts of birds but
diminished in the human upper airway, whereas α2-6-linked Neu5Ac predominates
in the human upper airway. The switch from α2-3 to α2-6 binding is thought to
underlie the emergence of new human influenza strains. This switch can occur
by mutation of one or two amino acids in the hemagglutinin sialic acid–binding
pocket, and the emergence of α2-6 sialic acid binding is now monitored among
animal influenza strains to detect potential new human influenza pathogens.
Pigs are susceptible to both α2-3 (avian) and α2-6 (human) viruses, and act as
a “mixing vessel” to produce recombinant viruses capable of transmission from
birds to humans. Direct avian–human transmission is often associated with
enhanced morbidity, but human-to-human spread of avian influenza is uncommon.
Notably, ferrets are the most effective animal model for human influenza
studies as they have similar upper airway glycans terminated with α2-6 Neu5Ac.

On completing its cellular replication cycle, the release of influenza viruses
from infected cell surfaces relies on viral neuraminidase, which removes
sialic acid from the surface of the host cells and the virion envelope.
Without neuraminidase, newly formed virions stick together, form large rafts,
and do not spread to other cells. Two rationally designed influenza virus
neuraminidase inhibitor-based anti-influenza drugs, Relenza and Tamiflu,
operate on this basis ([Chapters 55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/) and
[57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)).

Several nonenveloped viruses also have sialic acid–binding proteins on their
icosahedral capsids including reovirus, adenovirus, parvovirus, and rotavirus,
each of which binds to different sets of sialoglycans.

Heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans, which are widely distributed on vertebrate
cells ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), are implicated in the infective
process of many pathogenic viruses including adeno-associated viruses, dengue
viruses, hepatitis C virus, vaccinia virus, HIV, papillomavirus, and virtually
all herpesviruses. In many cases HS is a coreceptor, initiating attachment
before recruitment of other host receptor proteins that support viral entry. A
prominent example is HSV-1, also known as human herpesvirus 1 (HHV-1), one of
the eight currently known human herpesviruses that cause widespread disease.

HSV-1 establishes latent, recurrent infections of mucous membranes,
particularly lesions of the mouth and lips (cold sores, fever blisters) but
also of genital tract and cornea, the latter of which may cause blindness.
Unlike most other viruses, in which host cell binding and entry are mediated
by one or two viral proteins, herpesvirus entry requires several viral entry
glycoproteins, some of which are shared among all herpesvirus family members.
One shared viral glycoprotein, gB, initiates virus attachment by binding to
cell-surface HS, as does gC in HSV-1. Once bound, the virus “surfs” the cell
surface until it encounters other receptors, including a specific HS
structure, 3-O-sulfation on GlcNAc. This relatively rare HS modification
induces binding of gD, another glycoprotein shared in the herpesvirus family.
Once gD binds, it recruits additional proteins required for fusion and host
cell entry.

Removal of HS from cell surfaces enzymatically or by selection of mutant cells
defective in HS expression renders the cells resistant to HSV-1 infection by
reducing virus attachment. Soluble heparin and HS mimetics inhibit viral
infection by masking the HS-binding domain on the virus envelope. Immobilized
HS columns bind to the HIV-1 viral entry proteins gB and gC, and HSV-1
deletion mutants lacking gB and gC exhibit impaired virus binding. Genetic
evidence of a role of 3-O-sulfation of HS GlcNAc in HSV–1 infection was
obtained by altering the expression of 3-O-sulfotransferase genes in cells and
living organisms. Recent evidence suggests that induced upregulation of the
host's own heparanase helps newly budded HSV-1 to disseminate, analogous to
the role of influenza neuraminidase. Although the herpesviruses have evolved
much more complex systems for host cell binding and entry, some of which
remain to be established, it is clear that HS plays important roles in viral
pathogenesis.

HIV is a retrovirus and the etiologic agent of the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS), a pandemic disease affecting tens of millions of people
worldwide. HIV is an enveloped virus with a surface dominated by spikes made
of two proteins, gp120 and gp41, of which gp120 mediates viral attachment to
host cells, primarily CD4+ T cells, by binding to the host cell-surface
receptor CD4 and a chemokine receptor coreceptor such as CCR5 or CXCR4. HIV
gp120 is heavily glycosylated, with N-linked glycans comprising half of the
spike mass and densely covering much of the spike surface. Dense glycosylation
is thought to aid in immune evasion by masking the underlying polypeptide.
However, gp120 glycans also actively support infection by co-opting host
lectins, including C-type lectins on dendritic cells ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).

Dendritic cells (DCs) are innate immune cells that capture and present
antigens to T cells to initiate adaptive immunity. DCs capture antigens, in
part, using C-type lectins that bind to glycan determinants common to
pathogens but uncommon on host cells. Although DCs are not numerous, they are
important in recognizing and presenting pathogen antigens to the adaptive
immune system. DCs that reside in submucosal tissues of the vagina and rectum
are early targets for HIV. Even with low levels of viral exposure, C-type
lectins on DCs trap and concentrate HIV for subsequent presentation to T
cells, the main site of HIV replication. DC-SIGN (dendritic cell–specific
intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin), mannose receptor, and
Langerin are some of the C-type lectins that are important for this process.
These lectins recognize dense arrays of mannose on pathogens including certain
viruses (HIV, CMV [cytomegalovirus], hepatitis C virus, dengue virus),
bacteria ( _Helicobacter_ , _Klebsiella_ , _Mycobacteria_ ), fungi ( _Candida_
), and parasites ( _Leishmania_ , _Schistosoma_ ). Although T cells normally
function to destroy pathogens and process their antigens for presentation,
lectin-bound HIV evades destruction for extended periods. The natural role of
DCs in presentation to T cells makes them ideal conduits for transmission of
HIV to CD4+ T cells, where CD4 and cytokine receptors support binding, fusion,
and viral replication. This process is termed _trans_ -infection and
facilitates early establishment of the HIV infection. DCs are not the only
cells co-opted by HIV; macrophages express the same lectins and may also
facilitate _trans_ -infection. Other host lectins on DCs and macrophages, such
as Siglec-1 ([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)) play a similar role in
facilitating uptake of viruses with heavily sialylated envelopes.

The nature of the relationship between microbes and the human host spans the
spectrum from mutually beneficial (symbiotic), to benefiting the microbe
without harming the host (commensal), to benefiting the microbe at the expense
of the host (pathogenic). Key factors determining the placement of any
particular microbe–host interaction along this continuum of potential outcomes
are the repertoire of glycans expressed on the host cell surfaces, the mucosal
barriers, and the glycan expressing and catabolizing capabilities of the
bacteria.

_Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron_ is an anaerobic bacterium that is one of the
most abundant members of the normal colonic microbiota in mice and humans.
This interesting microbe has evolved mechanisms to establish and maintain a
nonpathogenic, mutually beneficial relationship with its mammalian host. A
clue to this relationship came from examination of the gut epithelium of mice
that are raised under germ-free conditions. Without bacterial exposure, the
intestinal epithelium lacks expression of fucosylated glycoconjugates; when
normal colonic bacteria are present, Fucα1-2Gal glycan expression is abundant
on the surface of these host cells. _B. thetaiotaomicron_ preferentially uses
fucose both as an energy source and for incorporation into its own surface
capsule and glycoproteins, phenotypes that are required for successful
colonization and for proper immune development of the host. When dietary
fucose is low, the bacterium induces the expression of host
α1-2-fucosyltransferase, resulting in incorporation of fucose into surface
Fucα1-2Gal glycoconjugates on the epithelial lining. _B. thetaiotaomicron_
also expresses multiple fucosidases to cleave these terminal fucose residues
and a fucose permease for uptake of the released sugar. Thus, the gut
commensal has evolved a system for engineering the production of its own
nutrient source from its host; but because the system is regulated for use
only in times of need, the host in turn only has to synthesize enough
fucosylated glycans to support the maintenance of this important member of its
normal microbiota. Moreover, the well-adapted _B. thetaiotaomicron_ has
evolved additional elaborate systems for regulating its expression of
particular polysaccharide-binding proteins and glycosidases to forage and
consume sugars from the host's dietary intake when abundant or to switch over
to glycans in the host mucus lining when sufficient polysaccharides are
missing from the diet.

_H. pylori_ colonizes nearly half the world's population, but it triggers
chronic gastritis and stomach ulcers (conditions that are known to increase
the risk of stomach cancer) in only a small subset of these individuals.
Patterns of glycan expression in both host and microbe appear to help
determine whether _H. pylori_ persists as a benign commensal or triggers
disease pathology. _H. pylori_ expresses an adhesin (BabA) that can interact
directly with gastric epithelium-expressing glycans that terminate with the
Lewis b blood group antigen. Lewis b expression in human intestines is limited
to mucus-producing pit cells in the gastric epithelium. Transgenic mice
engineered to express Lewis b show enhanced binding of _H. pylori_ to their
gastric epithelium, which triggers an enhanced cellular immune response and
more severe gastritis. This microenvironment of immune activation appears to
set the stage for a glycan-based process of molecular mimicry that can promote
further host-cell damage. _H. pylori_ also expresses Lewis x–containing
structures in the O-antigen of its own LPS, which resemble Lewis x–modified
glycans on the surface of parietal cells in the gastric lining. This Lewis
antigen mimicry can be varied through the expression of two variable
α1,3-fucosyltransferases, FutA and FutB. Also, similar to _B.
thetaiotaomicron_ , _H. pylori_ has developed mechanisms to obtain fucose from
its host. The presence of _H. pylori_ stimulates the host to secrete α-L-
fucosidase 2 (FUCA2). This, in turn, increases the expression of the Lewis
x–containing LPS O-antigen in _H. pylori_. Variation in both organism and host
in the expression of Lewis x glycan structures and/or the adhesins may help
explain the wide range of potential clinical outcomes following colonization
by _H. pylori_.

This chapter provides only a glimpse of the diverse roles glycans play in the
interactions between individual viruses and bacteria with their hosts. As
scientists explore varying environments and their associated microbial
communities (which also include parasites, fungi, and bacteriophages), it is
becoming increasingly apparent that glycans influence every aspect of these
interactions and there remains so much more to discover.

The authors acknowledge contributions to the previous version of this chapter
from Victor Nizet and Jeffrey D. Esko and helpful comments and suggestions
from Felix Broecker, Natalie Silmon de Monerri, and Omai Garner.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.043

Parasitic protozoans and helminths (worms) synthesize glycans with structures
often different from those typically found in vertebrates and are typically
antigenic. Parasites also express glycan-binding proteins (GBPs) involved in
host invasion and parasitism. As part of the disease process, parasite glycans
can trigger the host's innate immune system, which can lead to the induction
of adaptive immune responses. This chapter discusses the major roles of
glycoconjugates in parasitic infections.

Parasitism is a condition in which one organism (the parasite) in some way
lives at the expense of the host. Parasites infect millions of people
worldwide and cause much suffering and death, especially in underdeveloped
countries ([Table 43.1](/books/NBK453068/table/CH43TB1/?report=objectonly)).
Like other types of infections (e.g., bacterial or viral; [Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)), parasite GBPs interact with host glycomes and
parasite glycans interact with host GBPs and antibodies. Thus, research on
parasite glycobiology and biochemistry could provide therapeutics for reducing
disease morbidity and mortality. Moreover, studies on the molecular pathology
of organisms, such as parasites that have evolved to deceive and compromise
the host immune system, provide novel insights into the regulation of human
innate and adaptive immune responses.

The majority of parasitic diseases are divided into two categories: those
caused by protozoans (single-celled organisms; [Table
43.2](/books/NBK453068/table/CH43TB2/?report=objectonly)) and those caused by
helminths (worms/metazoans; [Table
43.3](/books/NBK453068/table/CH43TB3/?report=objectonly)). The major classes
of protozoan parasites include _Plasmodium_ (causing malaria), _Entamoeba
histolytica_ (causing amebiasis), _Leishmania_ (causing leishmaniasis), and
_Trypanosoma_ (causing sleeping sickness and Chagas’ disease). Parasitic worms
include trematodes (ex. _Schistosoma mansoni_ , causing schistosomiasis),
nematodes (ex. _Ascaris lumbricoides_ ), and cestodes or tapeworms (ex.
_Taenia solium_ , causing taeniiasis). Worms are very large relative to host
cells. Thus, most worms live in the extracellular spaces of their hosts and
have evolved a variety of infective and protective strategies. Glycoconjugates
are important in both the life cycles and pathology of most major parasites.
For example, many parasitic protozoans and helminths have elaborated
intriguing mechanisms to target GBPs ([Chapter 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)) or
glycans in the host to promote parasitism, and to evade host immune responses.

Malaria is caused by _Plasmodium_ species, prominently _Plasmodium falciparum_
in humans. Malarial parasites lead a complicated life cycle, alternating
between a sexual reproduction stage in the female _Anopheles_ mosquito vector
and an asexual reproduction stage in mammalian tissues (hepatocytes and
erythrocytes) and the bloodstream ([Figure
43.1](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f1/?report=objectonly)). Cell–cell
interactions between the parasite and host are critical for the successful
completion of each stage.

Following inoculation into the bloodstream, the sporozoite's major
circumsporozoite protein interacts with heparan sulfate (HS) on the surface of
hepatocytes, which allows invasion and the first replication in the mammalian
host. Liver HS possesses an unusually high degree of sulfation compared with
similar glycosaminoglycans from other organs, suggesting the basis for the
selective targeting of _Plasmodium_ to hepatocytes.

Upon exit from the liver, _Plasmodium_ merozoites use multiple ligand–receptor
interactions to invade host erythrocytes. The merozoite proteins, such as the
erythrocyte-binding-like (EBL) proteins ([Table
43.4](/books/NBK453068/table/CH43TB4/?report=objectonly)), vary in their
dependency on sialic acid residues on the erythrocyte surface and play an
important role in erythrocyte invasion.

The glycophorins are the major sialic acid–containing glycoproteins on
erythrocytes. The EBL protein EBA-175 (erythrocyte-binding antigen-175)
recognizes clusters of sialylated O-glycans attached to glycophorin A,
particularly within a 30-amino-acid region that carries 11 O-glycans.
Desialylation of erythrocytes precludes interactions of some strains of _P.
falciparum_ , and individuals lacking glycophorins A or B are refractory to
invasion. Some strains of _P. falciparum_ can reversibly switch from sialic
acid–dependent to sialic acid–independent invasion, and this has important
implications for vaccine design against malaria parasites.

Pregnancy-associated malaria is a major cause of suffering and arises when _P.
falciparum_ –infected erythrocytes are sequestered in the placenta of pregnant
women. The parasite expresses the VAR2CSA protein, which mediates adherence of
the infected erythrocytes to placental chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) with very
high specificity and affinity (Kd ∼ 15 nm), promoting parasite infection and
invasion.

Eruption of the merozoites from infected erythrocytes releases free
glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs), which are prominent virulence factors
contributing to malaria pathogenesis ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)).
_P. falciparum_ GPIs mimic host GPIs and activate host GPI-associated
signaling pathways. The GPIs can activate host's macrophages, mainly through
Toll-like receptor-2 signaling, leading to the production of inflammatory
cytokines and up-regulation of cell adhesion molecules, such as E-selectin in
endothelial cells. Antibodies to these GPIs can neutralize their effects and
mitigate the pathology of the disease independently of direct infection.

In addition, the _P. falciparum_ genome encodes a number of enzymes involved
in N-glycosylation, O-glycosylation (O-fucosylation), and C-mannosylation.
Although N-glycans are truncated and typically contain only a chitobiosyl
core, GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ-Asn, mannose is abundantly present in GPI anchors.
There is also evidence suggesting that _Plasmodia_ may express a number of
unusual glycoconjugates, such as galactose- and glucose-containing
glycoproteins and glucose-containing glycolipids.

African trypanosomes ( _Trypanosoma brucei_ ) transmitted by blood-sucking
tsetse flies are the etiologic agents of nagana disease in cattle and sleeping
sickness in humans. A remarkable feature of these organisms is their ability
to survive extracellularly in the host bloodstream, where they are constantly
exposed to the immune system. Evasion of the host immune response depends on
“antigenic variation,” a highly evolved survival strategy that relies on
structural variance of GPI-anchored glycoproteins (variant surface
glycoproteins [VSGs]) on the trypanosome surface ([Figure
43.2](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f2/?report=objectonly)). VSGs are dimeric
proteins, consisting of two 55-kDa monomers that each carry N-linked
oligomannose-type glycans, which make up a large component of the dense
glycocalyx. As parasites multiply in the host bloodstream, the host mounts an
immune response that is effective against only the population of trypanosomes
expressing a particular VSG. Trypanosomes that have switched to an alternative
VSG coat (encoded among 1000 distinct VSG genes) escape immunological
destruction.

Within the gut of the tsetse fly, the trypanosome replaces its entire VSG coat
with acidic glycoproteins called procyclins ([Figure
43.2](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f2/?report=objectonly)). These GPI-anchored
proteins form a dense glycocalyx and are composed of polyanionic polypeptide
repeat domains projecting from the membrane. Unusual features are the presence
of a single type of N-glycan (Man5GlcNAc2) and GPI anchors that are modified
with branched poly-[ _N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) [Galβ1-4GlcNAc]n glycans. The terminal β-galactose
can be substituted with α2-3-linked sialic acid by a parasitic _trans_
-sialidase that transfers sialic acid from host glycoconjugates to the
parasite surface. This sialylation protects the parasite in the insect
intestine and can compromise the human immune system. Among parasites, genes
encoding _trans_ -sialidases have only been found in the protozoan genus
_Trypanosoma_ and occur in both _T. brucei_ and _Trypanosoma cruzi_.
Interestingly, there is also evidence for _trans_ -sialidase activities in
some bacteria and in human serum, but these are far less well studied.

_T. cruzi,_ transmitted by reduviid bugs, is the etiologic agent of Chagas’
disease, or South American trypanosomiasis. _T. cruzi_ has a dense coat of
glycosylinositol phospholipids (GIPLs) ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/))
and mucins ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) that project above the GIPL
layer ([Figure 43.3](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f3/?report=objectonly)). The
GIPLs contain the same basic structure as other GPI anchors, except that they
are heavily substituted with Gal, GlcNAc, and host-derived sialic acid. The
mucins contain large amounts of O-glycans composed of a serine- or threonine-
linked GlcNAc extended with one to five Gal residues that can be substituted
with sialic acid by a _trans_ -sialidase. For _T. cruzi_ sialylation is
believed to reduce the susceptibility of the parasite to anti-α-Gal antibodies
that are normally present in the mammalian bloodstream.

_T. cruzi_ also express lipopeptidophosphoglycan (LPPG), the major surface
glycan of the insect stage of the parasite ([Figure
43.3](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f3/?report=objectonly)). Depending on the
life-cycle stage, LPPG is composed of an inositolphosphoceramide-anchored
glycan or an alkylacylphosphatidylinositol-anchored glycan that includes
nonacetylated glucosamine, mannose, galactofuranose, and
2-aminoethylphosphonate (2-AEP). The lack of ceramide anchors and
galactofuranose in mammalian cells suggests potential targets for the
development of chemotherapeutic agents.

_Leishmania_ causes different forms of leishmaniasis, which manifest
clinically in three forms: cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and visceral—the latter
being fatal if untreated. _Leishmania_ parasites have a remarkable capacity to
avoid destruction in the hostile environments they encounter during their life
cycle, alternating between intracellular macrophage parasitism and
extracellular life in the gut of their sandfly vector ([Figure
43.4](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f4/?report=objectonly)).

Stage-specific adhesion is mediated by structural variation of the abundant
cell-surface glycoconjugate lipophosphoglycan (LPG), which contributes to
parasite survival in the hydrolytic midgut ([Figure
43.5](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f5/?report=objectonly)). The basic LPG
structure in all _Leishmania_ species consists of a 1- _O_ -alkyl-2- _lyso_
-phosphatidyl( _myo_ )inositol lipid anchor, a heptasaccharide core, a long
phosphoglycan (PG) polymer composed of (-6Galβ1-4Manα 1-PO4-) repeat units and
a small oligosaccharide cap. In many species, the PG repeats contain
additional substitutions that mediate key roles in stage-specific adhesion.
For example, in _Leishmania majo_ r, the PG repeats bear β1-3-galactosyl side-
chain modifications, which provide a binding site for the sandfly midgut
galectin, PpGalec. As parasites differentiate in the sandfly from amastigotes
into procyclic promastigotes, and finally to infective metacyclic stages, the
β1-3 Gal-modified PGs are capped by α1-2 arabinosyl residues, giving rise to a
structure that does not bind to PpGalec and thus facilitating detachment of
the parasite from the sandfly midgut. LPG is highly abundant on the parasite
surface, suggesting a central role for the glycoconjugate in the parasite's
infectious cycle, as well as allowing the parasite to establish successful
infections in the mammalian host. In addition, galectin-3 in the vertebrate
host may recognize some of the _L. major_ glycans as pathogen-associated
molecular patterns, facilitating leukocyte responses to infection.

_Leishmania_ also express an abundance of other important glycoconjugates,
such as GIPLs, GPI-anchored proteins, and secreted proteophosphoglycans (PPGs)
([Figure 43.5](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f5/?report=objectonly)) (also see
[Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). Most of the serine residues within PPGs
are phosphoglycosylated with Gal-Man-PO4\- repeats via unique phosphodiester
linkages. In _Leishmania mexicana_ , these highly anionic polysaccharides form
a gel-like matrix composed of interlocking filaments. These matrices enhance
parasite development in the sandfly, and contribute to the formation of a
parasitophorous vacuole in macrophages of the mammalian host, where the
parasite replicates.

Virtually every known glycoconjugate of _Leishmania_ shows some intersection
with the LPG biosynthetic pathway. The presence of molecules bearing similar
modifications raises the possibility that they share biosynthetic steps. The
early steps in LPG and GPI biosynthesis (up to Man-Man-GlcN-PI) occur in the
endoplasmic reticulum, and galactosylation of the LPG glycan core and assembly
of the PG repeats occurs in the Golgi apparatus ([Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). The phosphoglycan portions of LPG and PPG are
assembled by the sequential and alternating addition of mannose-PO4\- and
galactose, forming the characteristic -Galβ1-4Manα1-PO4\- repeats. Depending
on the species of _Leishmania_ , additional branching sugars can then be
added, creating a remarkable array of side chains that drive _Leishmania_
–sandfly vectorial competence.

The life cycle of _Entamoeba histolytica,_ which causes amoebic dysentery and
hepatic abscesses, includes the disease-inducing amebic or trophozoite stage
and the infectious cyst stage. Mature cysts are ingested by an animal, and
once inside the host gut, excystation produces the trophozoite that causes
pathology. The trophozoites can replicate or form cysts, which are passed via
feces to complete the cycle. _E. histolytica_ expresses several lectins, among
them a Gal/GalNAc lectin, a GPI-anchored heterodimeric glycoprotein. This
lectin mediates binding of the parasite to colonic mucins and plays a critical
role in parasite viability, and is a promising vaccine candidate against the
disease. The _Entamoeba_ cyst wall is composed mostly of chitin, and chitin-
binding lectins (including the Jacob and Jessie lectins) accompanied by
remodeling via chitinases, help to create the cyst wall.

_Entamoeba_ trophozoites synthesize cell-surface LPG and LPPG ([Figure
43.6](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f6/?report=objectonly)). The LPG consists
of a lipid anchor and a phosphoglycan component that resembles the
phosphoglycans of _Leishmania_ LPG. The LPPG GPI anchors are unique in that
they have a glycan backbone that contains the sequence Gal1Man2GlcN-( _myo_
)inositol, in which α-Gal replaces the terminal α1-2 mannose residue found in
typical protein anchors. _Leishmania_ LPG and LPPG are important as virulence
factors, because antibodies raised against these molecules inhibit the ability
of the parasites to kill target cells. Thus, such glycans may be the target
for vaccine development.

Schistosomiasis, a major parasitic disease associated with a high morbidity
worldwide is caused by parasitic trematodes. Three major species infect
humans: _Schistosoma japonicum_ , _S. mansoni_ , and _Schistosoma haematobium_
([Figure 43.7](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f7/?report=objectonly)).
Schistosoma is unique among helminths in that the male and female worms pair
to live together in the blood vessels of their host. The female lays eggs
about 4–6 weeks after infection, which adhere to the endothelium and migrate
through vessels into tissues. The eggs may become lodged in the host tissues,
where they sequester and induce granulomatous inflammatory responses. Eggs
trapped in the peripheral circulation can cause portal hypertension and
fibrosis, which are characteristic of chronic schistosomiasis and lead to
morbidity and often death. However, many eggs eventually pass into the stool
and continue the cycle through intermediate snail hosts, which are unique for
each _Schistosoma_ species. Thus, the geographical limitation to the spread of
this disease is the range of the intermediate host snails.

Schistosomes, especially the cercarial glycocalyx and eggs, generate huge
quantities of membrane-bound glycoproteins and glycosphingolipids. Many
glycoproteins derived from the tegument, gut, and eggs of the parasite are
highly antigenic and occur in the circulation of the infected animal. These
proteins are generally rich in complex glycan structures, and contain an
impressive array of O- and N-glycans. Fucosylated antigens are a common
feature of most schistosome glycoconjugates, including Lewis x (Lex), LacdiNAc
(LDN), and fucosylated LacdiNAc (LDNF) structures, and polyfucose branches
([Figure 43.8](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f8/?report=objectonly)).
Glycoconjugates from helminths lack sialic acids.

The glycoconjugate structures expressed among schistosome species show some
variation, but much less than between schistosomes and other helminths. For
example, _S. mansoni_ glycosphingolipids have extended difucosylated
oligosaccharides, but these structures are absent in _S. japonicum_
glycosphingolipids. In addition to schistosomes, _Dictyocaulus viviparous_ , a
parasitic nematode in cattle, is one of the few helminths to synthesize the
Lex antigen. In addition to schistosomes, _Echinococcus granulosus_ ,
_Dirofilaria immitis_ , and _Haemonchus contortus_ synthesize glycoproteins
containing LDN and LDNF, in addition to other fucosylated and xylosylated
glycans ([Figure 43.8](/books/NBK453068/figure/ch43.f8/?report=objectonly)).
The expression of many of these glycan structures is developmentally regulated
and stage-specific, but their fundamental roles in parasite development and
host pathogenesis are mostly unclear.

There is mounting evidence that the glycan antigens expressed by schistosomes
can modulate innate and adaptive immune responses. Individuals infected with
_Schistosoma_ species develop a wide variety of antibodies to glycan antigens,
which may provide partial protection against subsequent infections. A general
feature of helminth infections, including chronic schistosome infections, is
that T helper 2 (Th2) immune responses (promoting humoral immunity)
predominate over Th1 responses (promoting cellular immunity). Such Th2-driven
responses also contribute to the generation of alternatively activated
macrophages with wound-healing and anti-inflammatory properties. The induction
of an anti-inflammatory immune response facilitates survival of the parasites
in their hosts, but also benefits the host by reducing unrelated inflammatory
responses (e.g., in autoimmune diseases). Worm-derived molecules, possibly
species-dependent and including glycoconjugates, play a role in such
modulation of the host immune response. Helminths, and their secreted
products, are currently being evaluated as novel therapy for chronic
inflammatory disorders such as Crohn's disease and multiple sclerosis.

Schistosome glycans are recognized by antigen-presenting cells such as
dendritic cells and macrophages via GBPs, in particular C-type lectins
([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)), including pattern-recognition receptors
such as DC-SIGN (dendritic cell–specific intercellular adhesion
molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin) and the mannose receptor. For immune
responses to many helminths, collectins and surfactant protein D help to limit
the pathology of infection. Internalization and processing of parasite
glycoconjugates by dendritic cells can lead to polarization of adaptive immune
responses ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). The identification of many
antigenic glycoconjugate structures from schistosomes is helping in the design
of new diagnostic approaches for schistosomiasis. Because antibody responses
to schistosomes are mainly directed against antigenic glycan motifs, and
antibodies to such glycans can kill and inhibit parasite growth and egg
deposition, such glycans may be targets of vaccine development. The
characterization of schistosome glycosyltransferases responsible for antigenic
glycan biosynthesis, together with enzymes from the intermediate snail hosts,
may also help in the identification of new drug targets and the development of
glycan-based vaccines.

Glycoconjugates and GBPs, as discussed above, play an impressive role in host
infection by many different parasites. Several additional examples are shown
in [Table 43.4](/books/NBK453068/table/CH43TB4/?report=objectonly). Many
protozoan parasites appear to use GBPs as a major mechanism for host-cell
attachment and invasion. For example, _Acanthamoeba keratitis_ , which causes
severe eye infections involving the corneal epithelium, adheres to host cells
via a lectin-glycan interaction and precludes amoeba-induced cytolysis of
target cells. Adhesion is mediated by a mannose-binding protein, which is
strongly inhibited by Manα1-3Man disaccharides. Furthermore, mannose and
mannose-6-PO4\- can inhibit adhesion of _Giardia lamblia_ trophozoites, and
these glycans may be recognized by the parasite's antigenic protein taglin.
Other antigenic proteins, including several galectins, have been cloned from
parasitic nematodes including _Teladorsagia circumcincta_. Sporozoites from
_Cryptosporidium parvum_ , an opportunistic protozoan that infects individuals
with compromised immunity, have hemagglutinating activity, and a lectin on the
parasite surface may play a crucial role in host-cell attachment.

In addition, the glycan antigens of many parasites are being characterized in
an effort to develop vaccines and new diagnostics for the diseases they cause.
For example, the major antigenic glycoconjugates synthesized by larvae of the
parasitic nematodes _Toxocara canis_ and _Toxocara cati_ are O-methylated
trisaccharides that contain 2- _O_ -methyl fucosyl and galactosyl residues
([Chapter 25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)). The intestinal nematode _Trichinella
spiralis_ synthesizes several highly immunogenic glycoproteins carrying
complex N-glycans containing the unusual sugar tyvelose (3,6-dideoxy-D-
arabino-hexose). This structure is critical to induce a strong antibody
response to these glycans, which causes expulsion of the invading larvae from
the intestine and results in protective immunity.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Salvatore Turco and helpful input from Jennifer Groves.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.044

This chapter explores degradation and turnover of glycans in lysosomes,
especially with respect to human genetic disorders, with representative
glycans, illustrating features unique to different pathways. Degradation of
oligomannosyl N-glycans removed from misfolded, newly synthesized
glycoproteins is covered in [Chapters 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/) and
[45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/).

Most glycans are degraded in lysosomes by highly ordered pathways using endo-
and exoglycosidases, sometimes aided by noncatalytic proteins. Insights that
unraveled these complex pathways emerged from studies of rare human genetic
disorders called lysosomal storage diseases. In each disease, undigested
molecules accumulate in lysosomes. Clever experiments combining enzymology
with glycan structural analyses revealed the steps of the pathways and also
unlocked the mechanisms of lysosomal enzyme targeting ([Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)).

Lysosomes contain approximately 50 to 60 soluble hydrolases that degrade
various macromolecules. Most of the glycan-degrading enzymes (endo- and
exoglycosidases and sulfatases) have pH optima between 4 and 5.5, but a few
have higher pH optima, nearing neutral. Exoglycosidases cleave the glycosidic
linkage of terminal sugars from the nonreducing end of glycans (the outermost
left end of glycans for figures in this book, e.g., [Figure
44.1](/books/NBK453095/figure/ch44.f1/?report=objectonly)). Exoglycosidases
recognize only one monosaccharide (rarely two) in a specific anomeric linkage,
and are much less particular about the structure of the molecule beyond that
glycosidic linkage. This lack of specificity allows these enzymes to act on a
broad range of substrates. However, exoglycosidases do not usually work unless
all of the hydroxyl groups of the terminal sugar are unmodified. Acetate,
sulfate, or phosphate groups usually have to be removed before action of the
glycosidases. Esterases cleave acetyl groups and specific sulfatases remove
the sulfate groups on glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and N- or O-linked glycans.
Endoglycosidases cleave internal glycosidic linkages of larger chains. These
enzymes are often more tolerant of modifications of the glycan; in some cases,
they require a modified sugar for optimal cleavage.

Even though the lysosomal glycosidases perform similar reactions, their amino
acid sequences are only ∼15%–20% identical to each other. Thus, there are no
highly conserved glycosidase catalytic domains. Lysosomal enzymes are all
N-glycosylated and most are targeted to the lysosome by the
mannose-6-phosphate pathway ([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)), share
aspects of the recognition marker for assembly of mannose-6-phosphate on
N-linked glycans, and have affinity for mannose-6-phosphate receptors. The
concentration of enzymes within the lysosome is difficult to determine.
Proteinases such as cathepsins are estimated to be ∼1 mm; glycosidases are
probably present at much lower concentrations.

About 50 known inherited diseases impair lysosomal degradation of
macromolecules. Although each one is rare, together, their occurrence is about
one in every 5000 to 10,000 births. Loss of a single lysosomal hydrolase leads
to the accumulation of its substrate as undegraded fragments in tissues and
the appearance of related fragments in urine. Many of the human disorders have
animal models. Tables
[44.1](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB1/?report=objectonly),
[44.2](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB2/?report=objectonly), and
[44.3](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB3/?report=objectonly) show some of the
major clinical symptoms of diseases associated with the degradation of three
classes of glycans. Many of the diseases share overlapping symptoms, and yet
each disease has unique clinical features that allow it to be diagnosed. The
advent of exome and genome sequencing has shortened the diagnostic waiting
period for concerned families. Many of the diseases also present with a range
of severities. Usually, an infantile onset is the most severe and the juvenile
or adult onsets have milder symptoms. The later-onset forms may even affect
organ systems distinct from those affected by early onset forms. Hundreds of
mutations have been mapped in the different disorders. The severity usually
depends on the combination of mutated alleles. Predicting the disease severity
(prognosis) from the specific mutation is generally difficult. Complete
absence of a lysosomal hydrolase is uniformly severe. Hypomorphic alleles have
variable residual glycosidase activity making their prognosis is difficult.

It is not clear whether accumulating different types of undegraded glycans
leads to the different symptoms characteristic of each disease. There is no
evidence that the stored material causes lysosomes to burst and spew their
contents into the cytoplasm. Some leakage may occur into the cytoplasm or even
out of cells, or the cell may sense an “engorged” lysosome. The pathology
likely depends on the cell type and the cellular balance of synthesis and
turnover rates. For instance, dermatan sulfate (DS), a GAG ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), predominates in connective tissue, which might
explain the bone, joint, and skin problems in mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) I,
II, VI, and VII. [Keratan sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/keratansulfate/) (KS), another GAG, is present in cartilage; therefore,
MPS IV is largely a skeletal disease. Gangliosides ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) are most abundant in neurons; therefore,
gangliosidoses are predominantly brain disorders. The importance of glycogen
for muscle explains the impact of Pompe disease on the heart and diaphragm,
leading to rapid lethality in that disease. Given the balance between
synthesis and degradation of multiple glycans, reducing synthesis somewhat by
the use of an inhibitor may help to retard the accumulation of undegraded
material and reduces the pathology of some diseases.

The great majority of N- and O-glycans reaching the lysosome contain only six
sugars linked in one or two anomeric configurations: β- _N_ -acetylglucosamine
(βGlcNAc), α/β- _N_ -acetylgalactosamine (α/βGalNAc), α/β-galactose (α/βGal),
α/β-mannose (α/βMan), α-fucose (αFuc), and α-sialic acid (αSia). Each linkage
should theoretically require only one anomer-specific glycosidase, assuming
that each glycosidase ignores the underlying glycan. This number is close to
the known number of enzymes in most glycan degradation pathways. However, some
linkages require a specific enzyme outside of this group. For example, β-N-
acetylhexosaminidase cleaves both βGlcNAc and βGalNAc residues. Degradation of
the GlcNAcβAsn and GalNAcαSer/Thr linkages also requires specific enzymes.

Much of what we know about this pathway comes from analysis of products that
accumulate in patients' tissues or urine because of the absence of one of the
degradative enzymes ([Table
44.1](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB1/?report=objectonly)). Structural analyses
of monosaccharide-labeled glycoproteins during degradation in perfused rat
liver aided elucidation of the pathway. By conducting the latter studies in
the presence of inhibitors of different lysosomal enzymes, a picture of
simultaneous and independent bidirectional degradation of the protein and
carbohydrate chains emerged ([Figure
44.1](/books/NBK453095/figure/ch44.f1/?report=objectonly)). The relative
degradation rates vary depending on structural and steric factors of the
protein and the sugar chains. The accumulation of GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβAsn in
cells that cannot cleave the GlcNAcβAsn linkage clearly shows that degradation
of the sugar chain does not require advanced cleavage of the Asn. Much of the
protein is probably degraded before N-glycan catabolism begins. Removal of
core fucose (Fucα1-6GlcNAc) and probably any peripheral fucose residues linked
to the outer branches of the chain (e.g., Fucα1-3GlcNAc) appears to be the
first step in degradation because patients lacking α-fucosidase still have
intact N-glycans bound to asparagine. Glycosylasparaginase (aspartyl-N-acetyl-
β-D-glucosaminidase) then cleaves the GlcNAcβAsn bond, producing a
glycosylamine +Asp, not Asn. In rodents and primates, chitobiase (an endo-β-N-
acetylglucosaminidase) removes the reducing _N_ -acetylglucosamine, leaving
the oligosaccharide with only one terminal GlcNAc. In many other species,
splitting of the chitobiose linkage (GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc) uses the β-N-
acetylhexosaminidase mentioned below as the last step in degradation. Either
pathway appears to be effective, leaving the presence of chitobiase in some
species unexplained. The oligosaccharide chain is then sequentially degraded
by sialidases and/or α-galactosidase, followed by β-galactosidase, β-N-
acetylhexosaminidase, and α-mannosidases. The remaining Manβ1-4GlcNAc (or
Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc in species lacking chitobiase) is cleaved by
β-mannosidase to mannose and GlcNAc (or chitobiose, which is then cleaved to
GlcNAc by β-N-acetylhexosaminidase).

Lysosomal sialidase (neuraminidase), β-galactosidase, and a serine
carboxypeptidase called protective protein/cathepsin A form a complex in the
lysosome that is required for efficient degradation of sialylated
glycoconjugates. Cathepsin A protects β-galactosidase from rapid degradation
and also activates the sialidase precursor, but the protection does not depend
on the catalytic activity of cathepsin A. Mutations in this protective protein
lead to galactosialidosis in which the simultaneous deficiencies in
β-galactosidase and sialidase are secondary effects of defective cathepsin A.

Glycans that have GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAc, GlcAβ1-3Gal, or Galα1-3Gal on the outer
branches must first have these residues removed by β-N-acetylhexosaminidase,
β-glucuronidase, and α-galactosidase, respectively, before any further
digestion of the underlying oligosaccharide chains.

Oligomannosyl N-glycans that enter the lysosome are hydrolyzed by an
α-mannosidase to yield Manα1-6Manβ1-4GlcNAc, a common intermediate of hybrid
and complex N-glycans. A second α1-6-specific mannosidase can cleave this
linkage in humans and rats, but only on molecules that have a single core
region _N_ -acetylglucosamine (i.e., those generated by chitobiase cleavage).
Finally, β-mannosidase completes the degradation. Oligomannosyl N-glycans
derived from dolichol-linked precursors or misfolded glycoproteins are handled
differently ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)).

Degradation of typical αGalNAc-initiated O-glycans has not been systematically
studied. Many of the outer structures of N-glycans are also found on O-glycans
([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)); therefore, degradation of these glycans
probably uses the same group of exoglycosidases as discussed above. An
exception to this is the linkage region, GalNAcα-O-Ser/Thr. Patients with
Schindler disease lack the α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase specific for αGalNAc
and will not cleave αGlcNAc. This same enzyme probably removes terminal
αGalNAc from blood group A–containing glycans (GalNAcα1-3Gal) and some
glycolipids such as the Forsmann antigen
(GalNAcα1-3GalNAcβ1-3Galα1-4Galβ1-4GlcβCer). Patients lacking α-N-
acetylgalactosaminidase accumulate GalNAc-containing glycopeptides in their
urine, but curiously they also accumulate more complex, extended glycopeptides
containing _N_ -acetylglucosamine, galactose, and sialic acid. The structures
are the same as those found on some native glycoconjugates. Their production
could result from a general slowdown of oligosaccharide degradation, or may
arise by reassembly of glycans on accumulated GalNAcα-O-Ser/Thr glycopeptides.

GAGs, including heparan sulfate (HS), chondroitin sulfate (CS), DS, KS, and
hyaluronan, are degraded in a highly ordered fashion. The first three are
O-xylose-linked to core proteins ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), KS is
N- or O-linked, and hyaluronan is a free glycan ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). Some proteoglycans are internalized from the cell
surface and the protein portion is degraded. The GAG chains are then partially
cleaved by enzymes such as endo-β-glucuronidases or endohexosaminidases that
clip at a few specific sites. [Endoglycosidase](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/endoglycosidase/) cleavage creates multiple terminal residues that can be
degraded by unique or overlapping sets of sulfatases and exoglycosidases.
Structural analyses of partially degraded fragments in the lysosomes of cells
from patients with MPS revealed both the degradation pathways and genetic
defects responsible ([Table
44.2](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB2/?report=objectonly)). The clinical
severities and manifestations vary even with mutations in the same gene. For
instance, MPS I is clinically subdivided into Hurler (most severe),
Hurler–Scheie, and Scheie syndromes, although the three disorders represent a
continuum of the same disease ([Table
44.2](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB2/?report=objectonly)). Hurler–Scheie
patients progress more slowly and die in early adulthood, whereas Scheie
patients can survive to middle or old age. The milder forms of this disease do
not cause intellectual disability.

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) ([Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)) is the largest and most abundant GAG: a 70-kg
person degrades 5 g of hyaluronan (molecular mass 107 Da) per day. Degradation
of hyaluronan involves a series of two endo-β-N-acetylhexosaminidases called
hyaluronidases (Hyal-1 and Hyal-2), β-glucuronidase, and finally β-N-
acetylhexosaminidase. Hyal-2 is active at low pH and is GPI-anchored on the
cell surface. This enzyme associates both with hyaluronan in lipid rafts and
with an Na+/H+ exchanger to create an acidic microenvironment. Cleavage
generates fragments of ∼20 kDa (approximately 50 disaccharides), which are
internalized, delivered to endosomes, and then finally to lysosomes, where the
fragments are degraded by Hyal-1 into tetra- and disaccharides ([Figure
44.2](/books/NBK453095/figure/ch44.f2/?report=objectonly)). The
exoglycosidases are thought to participate in the degradation of the larger
fragments as well as that of the di-and tetrasaccharide units. Mutations in
_HYAL-1_ cause MPS IX.

HS ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) is first degraded by an
endoglucuronidase, heparanase, followed by a well-ordered sequential
degradation. An example is shown in [Figure
44.2](/books/NBK453095/figure/ch44.f2/?report=objectonly). A terminal iduronic
acid-2-sulfate must be desulfated by iduronic acid-2-sulfatase to make the
modified sugar a substrate for α-iduronidase. If glucuronic acid
(GlcA)-2-sulfate is at this position, GlcA-2-sulfatase removes the sulfate
before β-glucuronidase cleavage. The new terminal glucosamine sulfate
(GlcNSO4) is the next sugar for cleavage, requiring three steps. Sulfate is
first removed by N-sulfatase forming glucosamine, which cannot be cleaved by
α-N-acetylglucosaminidase. The free amino group is N-acetylated by an
N-acetyltransferase embedded in the lysosomal membrane, converting glucosamine
to _N_ -acetylglucosamine, which is a substrate of α-N-acetylglucosaminidase.
In the second step, acetyl CoA donates the acetyl group to a histidine residue
in the cytoplasmic domain of the N-acetyltransferase. The acetyl group then
becomes available on the luminal side of the lysosomal membrane and is
transferred at low pH to the amino group of glucosamine. If cleavage of
glucuronic acid reveals a 6-O-sulfated αGlcNAc, the sulfate is removed by a
specific GlcNAc-6-sulfatase before GlcNAc removal. [Table
44.2](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB2/?report=objectonly) provides a list of
the enzymatic defects in HS degradation and the disorders that result.

DS and CS are related GAG chains based on a repeating polymer of βGlcA and
βGalNAc ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). [Figure
44.3](/books/NBK453095/figure/ch44.f3/?report=objectonly) shows that a
combination of endoglycosidases, sulfatases, and exoglycosidases degrades DS
in the lysosome. Iduronic acid-2-sulfatase is followed by α-iduronidase. The
terminal GalNAc-4-SO4 can be removed by either of two pathways. In the first
pathway, a GalNAc-4-SO4 sulfatase acts followed by β-N-acetylhexosaminidase A
or B to remove _N_ -acetylgalactosamine. In the second, β-N-
acetylhexosaminidase A removes the entire GalNAc-4-SO4 unit followed by
sulfatase cleavage. Absence of the GalNAc-4-SO4 sulfatase (MPS VI) is unique
to the DS pathway. β-Glucuronidase cleaves the β-glucuronic acid residue and
the process is repeated on the rest of the molecule.

To degrade CS, GalNAc-6-SO4 sulfatase and GalNAc-4-SO4 sulfatase work in
combination with β-N-acetylhexosaminidase A or B and β-glucuronidase.
Hyaluronidases can also degrade CS, but no CS-specific endoglycosidases have
been found.

KS is an N- or O-glycan with a heavily sulfated poly-[ _N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/) chain.
Mammalian cells do not have an endoglycosidase to break down KS ([Figure
44.3](/books/NBK453095/figure/ch44.f3/?report=objectonly)). The sequential
action of sulfatases and exoglycosidases is needed. Galactose-6-SO4 sulfatase
is the same enzyme that desulfates GalNAc-6-SO4 in CS degradation. This
hydrolysis is followed by β-galactosidase digestion, leaving a terminal
GlcNAc-6-SO4. Desulfation by the sulfatase followed by cleavage with β-N-
acetylhexosaminidase A or B eliminates GlcNAc-6-SO4. Alternatively, β-N-
acetylhexosaminidase A can directly release GlcNAc-6-SO4, followed by
desulfation of the monosaccharide.

Degradation of the core region of O-linked KS (skeletal type; type II)
probably occurs by the same route as other O-glycans. The N-glycan corneal-
type KS (type I) is probably degraded by the same set of enzymes used for
N-glycan degradation. The O-xylose-linked GAG chains (DS, CS, and HS) all
share a common core tetrasaccharide: GlcAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ-O-Ser. An
endo-β-xylosidase has been detected in rabbit liver. How the linkage regions
are degraded is not established.

A very rare human disorder is multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD). All
sulfatases are casualties of this defect because they all undergo a
posttranslational conversion of an active site cysteine residue to a Cα-
formylglycine (2-amino-3-oxopropionic acid) catalyzed by the Cα-formylglycine-
generating enzyme (FGE) which is essential for activity. In essence, the SH
group of cysteine is replaced by a double-bonded oxygen atom that probably
acts as an acceptor for cleaved sulfate groups. Loss-of-function mutations in
the _FGE_ gene lead to inactive sulfatases. This deficit affects GAG
degradation and any other sulfated glycan such as sulfatides.

Glycosphingolipids ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) are degraded from the
nonreducing end by exoglycosidases while they are still bound to the lipid
moiety ceramide. Because glycosphingolipids share some of the same outer sugar
sequences found in N- and O-glycans ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)),
many of the same glycosidases are used for their degradation ([Figure
44.4](/books/NBK453095/figure/ch44.f4/?report=objectonly)). However, specific
hydrolases cleave the glucose–ceramide and galactose–ceramide bonds. Besides
specific enzymes, noncatalytic sphingolipid activator proteins (SAPs or
saposins) help to present the lipid substrates to enzymes for cleavage.
Endoglycoceramidases from leeches and earthworms release the entire glycan
chain from the lipid, much like PNGase releases N-glycans from proteins.

Some exoglycosidases are unique to glycolipid degradation, and their absence
causes glycolipid storage diseases ([Table
44.3](/books/NBK453095/table/CH44TB3/?report=objectonly)). Glucocerebrosidase,
also called β-glucoceramidase, is specific for the degradation of the GlcβCer
bond. The loss of this enzyme causes Gaucher's disease. A specialized
β-galactosidase, β-galactoceramidase, hydrolyzes the bond between galactose
and ceramide and can also cleave the terminal galactose from lactosylceramide.
Loss of this enzyme produces Krabbe disease. Galactosylceramide is often found
with a 3-sulfate ester (sulfatide) and a specific sulfatase (arylsulfatase A)
is needed for its removal before β-galactosylceramidase action. Loss of this
sulfatase causes metachromatic leukodystrophy and the accumulation of
sulfatide. Glycolipids terminated with α-galactose residues (globo-series,
[Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)) are degraded by a specific
α-galactosidase, the loss of which causes Fabry disease.

Sugars that lie too close to the lipid bilayer apparently give limited access
to soluble lysosomal enzymes, and additional proteins called saposins are
required to present the substrates to the enzymes. Saposins (SAPs), also
called “liftases,” form complexes with multiple degradative enzymes for more
efficient hydrolysis of short glycolipids close to the membrane. SAPs are
derived from a 524-amino-acid precursor called prosaposin, which is processed
into four homologous activator proteins each comprising ∼80 amino acids:
saposins A, B, C, and D. Despite their homology, each saposin has different
properties. SAP-A and SAP-C both help β-glucosyl- and β-galactosylceramidase
degradation. SAP-B assists arylsulfatase A, α-galactosidase, sialidase, and
β-galactosidase. The activation mechanism of SAPs is thought to be similar to
that of the GM2 activator described below. SAP-D and SAP-B also assist in
sphingomyelin degradation by sphingomyelinase. Complete absence of prosaposin
is lethal in humans, and deficiencies in SAP-B and SAP-C lead to defects that
clinically resemble arylsulfatase A deficiency (metachromatic leukodystrophy)
and Gaucher's disease. These symptoms might be predicted based on the enzymes
that these saposins assist.

GM2 activator protein forms a complex with either GM2 or GA2 and presents them
to β-N-acetylhexosaminidase A for cleavage of β-GalNAc. The activator protein
binds a molecule of glycolipid, forming a soluble complex, which can be
cleaved by the hexosaminidase. The resulting product is then inserted back
into the membrane, and the activator presents the next GM2 molecule, and so
on. Genetic loss of this activator protein causes the accumulation of GM2 and
GA2, resulting in the AB variant of GM2 gangliosidosis.

Endocytic vesicles deliver membrane components to the lysosome for degradation
and are often seen as intralysosomal multivesicular bodies (MVBs). They appear
like vesicles within the lysosome and are especially prominent in patients
with glycolipid storage disorders. How do “vesicles within vesicles” form and
what is their function? The internal surface of the lysosomal membrane has a
thick, degradation-resistant glycocalyx of integral and peripheral membrane
proteins decorated with poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamines, which protect the
lysosomal membrane against destruction. However, these proteins would also
shield incoming membranes from degradation if vesicle fusion simply occurred.
By creating multiple internal membranes seen in typical MVBs, the target
molecules are exposed to the soluble lysosomal enzymes, and digestion proceeds
efficiently on the membrane surfaces of these internal vesicles.

MVB formation starts with inward budding of the limiting endosomal membrane.
Lipids and proteins are sorted to either the internal or the limiting
membrane. Ubiquitination of cargo proteins targets them to internal vesicles
of MVBs, but ubiquitin-independent routes also exist. Intra-endosomal
membranes and limiting endosomal membrane have different lipid and protein
compositions. Membrane segregation and lipid sorting prepare the internal
membranes for lysosomal degradation. During maturation of the internal
membranes, cholesterol is continually stripped away (to <1%) and a negatively
charged lipid bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate (BMP) increases up to 45%. This
molecule is highly resistant to phospholipases. BMP also stimulates
sphingolipid degradation on the inner membranes of acidic compartments.
Because BMP is not present in the lysosomal outer membrane, the unique lipid
profile ensures that degradation by hydrolases and membrane-disrupting SAPs
occurs without digesting the lysosomal outer membrane.

Degradation of glycans is not always complete. Partially degraded or
incomplete glycans on glycoproteins, glycopeptides, and glycosphingolipids can
be internalized within a functional Golgi compartment containing sugar
nucleotides and glycosyltransferases and then elongated. In the case of
glycosphingolipids, this pathway makes a substantial contribution to total
cellular synthesis, but in glycoproteins it probably makes a relatively small
contribution. These processes can be salvage and repair mechanisms or may play
an integral part in an unidentified physiological pathway.

The half-life of certain membrane proteins is longer than the half-life of
their sugar chains. Terminal monosaccharides turn over faster than those near
the reducing end of the glycan, suggesting that terminal sugars are removed by
exoglycosidases. Cleavage may occur at the cell surface or when proteins are
endocytosed in the course of normal membrane recycling. Because the mildly
acidic late endosomes contain lysosomal enzymes with a fairly broad pH range,
terminal sugars such as sialic acid can be cleaved. If the endocytosed
proteins are not degraded in lysosomes, the proteins may reencounter
sialyltransferases in the Golgi, become resialylated, and appear again on the
cell surface. A similar situation may occur if a protein has lost both sialic
acid and galactose residues from its glycans. Some membrane proteins
synthesized in the presence of oligosaccharide processing inhibitors can still
reach the cell surface in an unprocessed form. Subsequent incubation in the
absence of inhibitors leads to normal processing over time. The extent of
processing and the kinetics depend on the protein and the cell type. Because
Golgi enzymes are not distributed identically in all cells, the extent of
reprocessing is variable. Most studies have monitored N-glycans, but membrane
proteins with O-glycans probably behave similarly.

The majority of the newly synthesized glucosylceramide arrives at the cell
surface by a Golgi-independent cytoplasmic pathway. Some of this material, as
well as glucosylceramide generated by partial degradation of complex
glycosphingolipids, can recycle to the Golgi. There, like glycoproteins,
simple glycosphingolipids can serve as acceptors for the synthesis of longer
sugar chains. In the lysosome, sphingosine is produced by complete degradation
of glycosphingolipids and reused. Together, these pathways, especially the
latter, may account for the majority of complex glycolipid synthesis in many
cells. Depending on the physiological state of the cell and synthetic demands,
the de novo pathway starting from serine and palmitoyl CoA may account for
only 20%–30% of the total synthesis. Shuttling the recycled components through
and among the various organelles appears to involve vimentin intermediate
filaments. Mechanisms and details of this process are presently lacking.

[Monosaccharide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/monosaccharide/) salvage is
discussed in [Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/). Monosaccharides derived from
glycan degradation are transported back into the cytoplasm using transporters
specific for neutral sugars, N-acetylated hexoses, anionic sugars, sialic
acid, and glucuronic acid. Turnover of glycans is high and the salvage of
sugars can be quite substantial. There have been few studies comparing the
actual contributions of exogenous monosaccharides, those salvaged from glycan
turnover, and those generated from de novo synthesis. Cells probably differ in
their preference for each source of monosaccharides. These differences may
explain why monosaccharide therapy used to treat some glycosylation disorders
is effective in certain cells and not others.

Lysosomal degradation of glycans can be blocked by raising the intralysosomal
pH, by inactivating a particular glycosidase, by mutation, or by protein-
specific inhibitors.

Lysosomal enzymes usually have acidic pH optima and adding ammonium chloride
or chloroquine slows degradation by increasing the intralysosomal pH. However,
some lysosomal enzymes have relatively broad pH optima, higher than the
lysosome. Some active “lysosomal” enzymes can be found in early and late
endosomes, which have a higher pH than lysosomes.

[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) inhibitors are
covered in [Chapter 55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/) but some of these agents also
inhibit specific lysosomal enzymes. For example, swainsonine blocks lysosomal
α-mannosidase as well as the α-mannosidase II involved in glycoprotein
processing. Sheep and cattle become neurologically deranged by eating food
rich in swainsonine, which is also called locoweed. These temporary symptoms
are likely induced because lysosomal α-mannosidase is inhibited. Undegraded
oligosaccharides probably accumulate in affected animals. Although many
inhibitors block various enzymes in vitro, they may not be effective in cells
or whole animals because they may not enter the lysosome at sufficient
concentrations.

Study of lysosomal enzyme defects provided major insights into catabolic
pathways and showed their importance to human health. Mannose-6-phosphate
targeting of lysosomal enzymes was discovered by showing that cocultivation of
fibroblasts from patients with different storage diseases led to the
disappearance of stored material in both types of cells. Each supplied the
corrective factors (i.e., lysosomal enzymes) that the other cell lacked by
delivery of secreted enzymes through cell-surface mannose-6-phosphate
receptors ([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). Cross-correction highlights
the fact that only a relatively small amount of enzyme may be needed to
prevent accumulation of storage products and the resulting pathology. Some
estimates suggest that <5% of normal β-N-acetylhexosaminidase activity may be
sufficient to prevent pathological symptoms of Tay–Sachs disease. In fact, the
index Scheie patient with α-L-iduronidase deficiency had <1% normal activity
in fibroblasts and lived 77 years.

Current therapeutic approaches include enzyme replacement therapy (ERT),
substrate reduction therapy (SRT), and enzyme enhancement therapy (EET). Gene
replacement therapy is a promising future approach, but not yet clinically
tested. Accumulation of stored undegraded material occurs because the rate of
glycan synthesis is greater than its degradation at steady state. SRT reduces
the glycan's synthetic rate to counter low glycosidase activity. This
hypothesis was tested in a mouse model of Sandhoff disease by using _N_
-butyldeoxynojirimycin, an inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthase, which
catalyzes the first step in glycosphingolipid biosynthesis. When wild-type
mice were treated with this compound, the amount of glycosphingolipids fell
50%–70% in all tissues without obvious pathological effects. When this
compound was given to Sandhoff disease mice, the accumulation of GM2 in the
brain was blocked and the amount of stored ganglioside reduced. Thus, reducing
the synthesis of the primary precursor reduced the load of GM2 to levels that
were degradable by the glycosidase-deficient mice. Because this compound
inhibits the first biosynthetic step, theoretically this drug could reduce the
accumulation of storage products in any glycolipid storage disorder.

In clinical trials, _N_ -butyldeoxynojirimycin (miglustat, Zavesca) was
effective for many patients with mild-to-moderate Gaucher's disease, although
improvement varied as did side effects. Small trials in infantile Tay–Sachs
disease patients did not arrest neurological deterioration, but prevented
macrocephaly. Further clinical studies are likely to reveal the potential and
limitations of SRT.

EET or pharmacological chaperone therapy (PCT) is based on the concept that
inhibitors of an enzyme can act as molecular chaperones to stabilize the
mutated enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). When the enzyme reaches the
lysosome, the inhibitor dissociates at low pH and the abundant stored material
is gradually digested. The overall increase in activity is small, but it can
have significant clinical benefits. Clinical trials are in progress for
treating Fabry disease, Gaucher Type I, and Pompe disease, whereas preclinical
trials are being performed for GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis. A potential problem
is that some inhibitors may not cross the blood–brain barrier, limiting their
effectiveness in the central nervous system (CNS). The advent of high-
throughput screening methods and large chemical libraries increase the
potential of this approach. In addition, allosteric site binders can be
selected that remain bound to the enzyme and any successful compound could be
used in combination with ERT to further enhance activity.

ERT has been quite successful for treating Gaucher's disease. Injection of
glucocerebrosidase carrying mannose-terminated N-glycans targets the enzyme to
the macrophage/monocytes, which are the primary sites of substrate
accumulation. In use now for many years, the added enzyme consistently
improves patients' clinical features with minimal side effects. The cost of
treatment is high, and high doses are no more effective than lower doses for
improving visceral and hematological pathologies. The proven effectiveness
makes glucocerebrosidase the favorite therapy for these patients, but terminal
mannose residues cannot be used to target the enzyme to other cells or organs
or to enable treatment of other lysosomal storage disorders. Insufficient
infused enzyme crosses the blood–brain barrier, thus, the enzyme (Cerezyme)
works very well for type I disease without neurological involvement but not
for the less common Gaucher's with neurological involvement. In addition,
patients sometimes develop antibodies against the injected human protein.

ERT trials with other recombinant lysosomal enzymes have progressed. Enzyme
replacement therapy is available for Fabry disease, Pompe disease, and
mucopolysaccharidosis types I, II, IVA, and VI and is under development for
others. Recombinant α-galactosidase for Fabry disease works well and
recombinant α-L-iduronidase for MPS I works very well with the intermediate
severity form (Hurler–Scheie), but its effect is unclear for patients with the
more common neurological form (Hurler syndrome). Recombinant
N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase B; Naglazyme) was approved
for MPS VI, as was α-glucosidase (Myozyme) for treating Pompe disease
patients. Iduronic acid-2-sulfatase (Elaprase) is approved for treating Hunter
syndrome. These results clearly validate this approach. The efficacy of most
of these enzymes relies on the engineering of Man-6-P-containing glycans. This
is one of the foremost examples of how the clinically motivated exploration of
a disorder (I-cell disease) led to the discovery of Man-6-P-based targeting of
lysosomal enzymes ([Chapter 33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/))and the development of
an entire industry targeting therapy for multiple diseases. The availability
of animals deficient in specific lysosomal enzymes offers appropriate systems
to test the efficacy of corrective genes, compounds, and enzymes.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Michelle Dookwah,
Chrissa Dwyer, and Bastian Ramms.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.045

This chapter discusses inherited human diseases that affect glycan
biosynthesis and metabolism. Representative examples of diseases caused by
defects in several major glycan families are described. Disorders affecting
the degradation of glycans are described in [Chapter
44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/).

Nearly all inherited disorders in glycan biosynthesis were discovered in the
last 20 years. They are rare, biochemically and clinically heterogeneous, and
usually affect multiple organ systems. Some defects strike only a single
glycosylation pathway, whereas others impact several. Defects occur in (1) the
activation, presentation, and transport of sugar precursors; (2) glycosidases
and glycosyltransferases; and (3) proteins that traffic glycosylation
machinery or maintain Golgi homeostasis. A few disorders can be treated by the
consumption of monosacccharides. The rapid growth in the number of these
discovered disorders is shown in [Figure
45.1](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f1/?report=objectonly).

Selected disorders are listed in [Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly) and all known
disorders in [Online Appendix
45A](/books/n/glyco3/app_glycosylation_disorder/). Disease nomenclature has
evolved. Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) were originally defined
as genetic defects in N-glycosylation, but now the term is applied to any
glycosylation defect, by indicating the mutated gene followed by “-CDG” suffix
(e.g., PMM2-CDG). CDGs are rare primarily because embryos with complete
defects in a step of glycosylation do not usually survive to be born,
documenting the critical biological roles of glycans in humans. CDG patients
that survive are usually hypomorphic, retaining at least some activity of the
pathways involved.

The broad clinical features of disorders in which N-glycan biosynthesis is
defective involve many organ systems, but are especially common in the central
and peripheral nervous systems, hepatic, visual, and immune systems. The
generality and variability of clinical features makes it difficult for
physicians to recognize CDG patients. The first were identified in the early
1980s based primarily on deficiencies in multiple plasma glycoproteins. The
patients were also delayed in reaching growth and developmental milestones and
had low muscle tone, incomplete brain development, visual problems,
coagulation defects, and endocrine abnormalities. However, many of these
symptoms are seen in patients with other inherited multisystemic metabolic
disorders, such as mitochondria-based diseases. CDG patients can be
distinguished because they often have abnormal glycosylation of common liver-
derived serum proteins containing disialylated, biantennary N-glycans. Serum
transferrin is especially convenient because it has two N-glycosylation sites
each containing disialylated biantennary N-glycans. Different glycoforms can
be resolved by isoelectric focusing (IEF) or ion-exchange chromatography, but
better accuracy and sensitivity is achieved by mass spectrometry
([MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/)) of purified
transferrin. This simple litmus test alerts physicians to likely CDG patients
without knowing the gene or molecular basis of the disease.

CDG defects may be divided into two types based on transferrin glycoforms.
Type I (CDG-I) patients lack one or both N-glycans because of defects in the
biosynthesis of the lipid-linked oligosaccharide
([LLO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/lipidlinkedoligosaccharidello/)) and its
transfer to proteins. Type II (CDG-II) patients have incomplete protein-bound
glycans because of abnormal processing. These differences were used to name
the disorders (e.g., CDG-Ia and CDG-IIa), which oriented the search for a
defective gene. This system is gradually being replaced by the affected gene
name with a CDG suffix, such as PMM2-CDG. The biosynthetic pathways and
locations of N-glycan defects are shown in [Figure
45.2](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f2/?report=objectonly).

A complete absence of N-glycans is lethal. Therefore, known mutations generate
hypomorphic alleles, not complete knockouts. A deficiency in any of the steps
required for the assembly of [LLO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/lipidlinkedoligosaccharidello/) in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (e.g.,
nucleotide sugar synthesis or sugar addition catalyzed by a
glycosyltransferase) ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) produces a
structurally incomplete LLO. Because the oligosaccharyltransferase prefers
full-sized LLO glycans, this results in hypoglycosylation of multiple
glycoproteins. This means that some N-glycan sites are not modified.
Importantly, many deficiencies in LLO synthesis produce incomplete LLO
intermediates. Most of the LLO assembly steps are not easy to assay, but LLO
assembly is conserved from yeast to humans, and intermediates that accumulate
in CDG patients often correspond to the intermediates seen in mutant
_Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ strains with known defects in LLO assembly. Some
mutant mammalian cells (e.g., Chinese hamster ovary cells) have been shown to
have similar defects ([Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). The close homology
between yeast and human genes enables the normal human orthologs to rescue
defective glycosylation in mutant yeast strains, whereas mutant orthologs from
patients do not. This provides substantial clues to the likely human defect,
along with a system in which to perform functional assays.

PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) in [Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly) is the most common
CDG with more than 800 cases identified worldwide. The patients have moderate
to severe developmental and motor deficits, hypotonia, dysmorphic features,
failure to thrive, liver dysfunction, coagulopathy, and abnormal endocrine
functions. More than 100 mutations found in _phosphomannomutase 2_ ( _PMM2_ )
impair conversion of Man-6-P to Man-1-P, which is a precursor required for the
synthesis of GDP-mannose (GDP-Man) and dolichol-P-mannose (Dol-P-Man). Both
donors are substrates for the mannosyltransferases involved in the synthesis
of Glc3Man9GlcNAc2-P-P-Dol and its level is decreased in cells from PMM2-CDG
patients. Patients have hypomorphic alleles because complete loss of PMM2
function is lethal. Mouse embryos lacking _Pmm2_ die 2–4 days after
fertilization, whereas some of those with hypomorphic alleles survive. There
are currently no therapeutic options for PMM2-CDG patients.

MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) in [Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly) is caused by
mutations in _MPI_ ( _mannose-6-phosphate isomerase_ ). This enzyme
interconverts fructose-6-P and mannose-6-P (Man-6-P). In contrast to PMM2-CDG,
these patients do not have intellectual disability or developmental
abnormalities. Instead, they have impaired growth, hypoglycemia, coagulopathy,
severe vomiting and diarrhea, protein-losing enteropathy, and hepatic
fibrosis. Several patients died of severe bleeding before the basis of this
CDG was known. Mannose dietary supplements effectively treat these patients.
Man-6-P can be generated directly by hexokinase-catalyzed phosphorylation of
mannose ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). This pathway is intact in MPI-CDG
patients. Human plasma contains ∼50 µm mannose because of export following
glycan degradation and processing. Mannose supplements correct coagulopathy,
hypoglycemia, protein-losing enteropathy, and intermittent gastrointestinal
problems, as well as normalize the glycosylation of plasma transferrin and
other serum glycoproteins. Because orally administered mannose is well
tolerated, this approach is clearly a satisfyingly effective, although not
curative, therapy for this life-threatening condition.

Complete loss of the _Mpi_ gene in mice is lethal at about embryonic day 11.5.
N-[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) is normal, but
death results from accumulation of intracellular Man-6-P, which depletes ATP
and inhibits several glycolytic enzymes. Providing dams with extra mannose
during pregnancy only hastens the embryo's demise via the “honeybee effect,”
which occurs when bees are given only mannose instead of glucose. The bees
continue flying for a short time and then literally drop dead. They have low
MPI activity compared with hexokinase and therefore accumulate Man-6-P, which
they degrade, and perhaps rephosphorylate, further depleting ATP. Even more
serious is that Man-6-P inhibits several glycolytic enzymes. Entry of Man-6-P
into glycolysis is very slow and thus the bees become energy-starved and die
within a few minutes. MPI-CDG patients have sufficient residual MPI activity
and do not accumulate intracellular Man-6-P when given mannose, although the
amount is sufficient to correct impaired glycosylation. However, the honeybee
effect may be at play again in _Mpi_ -hypomorphic mice because dams given
modest amounts of mannose during pregnancy produce pups with no lenses. The
effect is quite specific to lens development in which the MPI activity is very
low even in normal mice. A hypomorphic mutation and increased substrate load
combines so that Man-6-P accumulates.

Other types of CDG-I have a broad range of clinical phenotypes including low
LDL, low IgG, kidney failure, genital hypoplasia, and cerebellar hypoplasia.
The reasons for these effects are unknown. Patients with mutations in nearly
all the remaining steps of [LLO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/lipidlinkedoligosaccharidello/) biogenesis have been found ([Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly); [Online Appendix
45A](/books/n/glyco3/app_glycosylation_disorder/); [Figure
45.1](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f1/?report=objectonly)) including defects
in dolichol biosynthesis ( _cis_ -isoprenyl transferase, dolichol-kinase, and
polyprenol reductase) and in a putative LLO flippase. Mutations in five of the
oligosaccharyltransferase subunits also cause a CDG.

CDG-II disorders ([Figure
45.2](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f2/?report=objectonly)) affect N-glycan
processing and include defects in glycosyltransferases, nucleotide sugar
transporters, vacuolar pH regulators, and multiple cytoplasmic proteins that
traffic glycosylation machinery within the cell and maintain Golgi
homeostasis.

In B4GALT1-CDG, glycans showed the loss of both galactose (Gal) and sialic
acid (Sia) from transferrin because of loss of β1-4 galactosyltransferase I
activity. A similar glycan pattern occurs in the X-linked SLC35A2-CDG, because
of loss of UDP-Gal transporter activity. Surprisingly, within a few years
after birth, abnormal glycosylation becomes normal. This is probably due to
somatic mosaicism of cells carrying the mutated _SLC35A2_ gene and unaffected
cells and selection against the affected cells.

Patients with leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II (LAD-II or SLC35C1-CDG)
were found to have mutations in _SLC35C1_ , encoding a GDP-Fucose (Fuc)
transporter. Here, transferrin sialylation was normal, so this defect was not
detected by the usual test, but some serum proteins and O-linked glycans on
leukocyte surface proteins were deficient in Fuc. One leukocyte protein
carries a selectin ligand glycan, sialyl Lewis x, that mediates leukocyte
rolling before extravasation of leukocytes from capillaries into tissues
([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). This defect greatly elevates
circulating leukocytes and decreases leukocyte extravasation so patients have
frequent infections. A few patients responded to dietary Fuc therapy. Sialyl
Lewis x reappeared on their leukocytes, and circulating neutrophils promptly
returned to normal levels. Fuc is converted into Fuc-1-P by fucose kinase and
then to GDP-Fuc by GDP-Fuc pyrophosphorylase ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). Fuc supplements must increase the amount of GDP-Fuc
enough to correct the defect. A mouse model of Fuc deficiency lacks de novo
biosynthesis of GDP-Fuc from GDP-Man ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). The
mice die without Fuc supplements, but providing Fuc in the drinking water
rapidly normalizes their elevated neutrophils. The treatment also corrects
abnormal hematopoeisis resulting from disrupted O-Fuc-dependent
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) signaling.

CDG-II defects are also caused by mutations in the eight-subunit conserved
oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex, which has multiple roles in trafficking within
the Golgi. COG7-CDG ([Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly)) was discovered
first. Trafficking of multiple glycosyltransferases and nucleotide sugar
transporters were disrupted in COG7-CDG. The mutation affects the synthesis of
both N- and O-glycans and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains. Mutations have now
been found in all COG subunits except COG3. Mammalian cells deficient in COG1,
COG2, COG3, and COG5 also show various degrees of altered glycosylation.
Various mutations in a vacuolar H+-ATPase subunit also disrupt multiple
glycosylation pathways, presumably because of an increase in Golgi pH and
concomitant decrease in glycosyltransferase activities.

Other genetic defects that impair N-glycan synthesis include I-cell disease,
which results from the lack of Man-6-P on lysosomal enzyme N-glycans ([Chapter
33](/books/n/glyco3/ch33/)). An unusual disorder called HEMPAS (hereditary
erythroblastic multinuclearity with positive acidified-serum test) leads to
abnormal red cell shape and instability (hemolysis) due to mutations in
_SEC23B,_ another intracellular trafficking protein that produces abnormal red
blood cell glycans in several pathways.

In an interesting twist, it is possible to have diseases caused by “excessive”
glycosylation. For example, Marfan syndrome results from mutations in
_fibrillin1_ ( _FBN1_ ) and one of these creates an N-glycosylation site that
disrupts multimeric assembly of FBN1. This may not be an isolated case. A
survey of nearly 600 known pathological mutations in proteins traveling the
ER–Golgi pathway showed that 13% of them create novel glycosylation sites.
This is far greater than predicted by random missense mutations and may mean
that hyperglycosylation leads to a new class of CDGs.

Galactosemia refers to mutations in three genes involved in Gal metabolism. In
“classical galactosemia,” Gal-1-P uridyltransferase (GALT; [Figure
45.3](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f3/?report=objectonly)) is deficient. This
results in excess Gal-1-P and decreased synthesis and availability of UDP-Gal.
Defects in UDP-Gal-4′-epimerase (GALE; [Figure
45.3](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f3/?report=objectonly)) or galactokinase
(GALK; [Figure 45.3](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f3/?report=objectonly)) also
cause the disease, but they are more rare.

GALT-deficient infants fail to thrive and have enlarged liver, jaundice, and
cataracts. A lactose-free diet ameliorates most of the acute symptoms by
reducing the amount of Gal entering the pathway and the accumulation of Gal
and Gal-1-P. Reducing Gal decreases galactitol and galactonate, which are
produced via reductive or oxidative metabolism of Gal, respectively.
Galactitol is not metabolized further and has osmotic properties that
contribute to cataract formation. Unfortunately, a Gal-free diet apparently
does not prevent the appearance of cognitive disability, ataxia, growth
retardation, and ovarian dysfunction that are characteristic of this disease.
The long-term complications in treated GALT-deficient individuals may be due
to small amounts of toxic metabolites that accumulate. Alternatively, the
complications may reflect dysfunctions that originated during fetal life. GALT
deficiency may decrease UDP-Gal and galactosylated glycans.
Hypogalactosylation of glycoproteins and glycolipids has been observed in some
GALT-deficient individuals. But, in addition to loss of Gal on glycans, some
patients who mistakenly receive Gal also synthesize transferrin that is
missing both N-glycans. The basis of the combined absence of Gal/Sia and
entire N-glycans is not understood, but the pattern returns to normal when the
patients are placed on a Gal-free diet.

Mutations altering O-Man glycans ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)),
primarily on α-dystroglycan (α-DG) cause at least 16 types of congenital
muscular dystrophy (CMD) termed dystroglycanopathies ([Figure
45.4](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f4/?report=objectonly)). α-DG at
neuromuscular junctions links skeletal muscle cell cytoskeleton to laminin in
the extracellular matrix. The clinical spectrum of dystroglycanopathies is
broad, ranging from very severe, and often lethal, musculo-oculo-
encephalopathies, such as Walker–Warburg syndrome (WWS), muscle–eye–brain
disease (MEB), and Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD) to milder
forms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. Genetic analysis of these disorders
has been indispensable for discovering functional glycans and their
biosynthesis. The complex pathway is presented in [Figure
45.4](/books/NBK453041/figure/ch45.f4/?report=objectonly) and [Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/). The pathway is initiated in the ER by the transfer
of Man to Ser/Thr via the protein O-mannosyltransferase complex containing
POMT1 and POMT2 ([Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly)). In the Golgi, this
pathway generates more than 20 O-Man glycans in mammals. An unusual feature on
one subset of O-Man glycans is the existence of a Man-6-P generated by POMK.
The Man-6-P containing CoreM3 glycan consists of Man-6-P, GlcNAc (transferred
by POMGNT2), and GalNAc (transferred by B3GALNT2). The trisaccharide core is
extended by two units of ribitol-5-phosphate and a single repeat of xylose
(Xyl) and glucuronic acid (GlcA). This structure is elongated by an
alternating disaccharide (β1-3Xylα1-3GlcA). Two ribitol-5-phosphates are
sequentially transferred by FKTN (fukutin) and FKRP (fukutin-related protein)
from CDP-ribitol, which is generated by ISPD. Xyl and GlcA in the single
repeat are transferred by TMEM5 and B4GAT1, respectively. The elongation by
the alternating disaccharide is catalyzed by LARGE _._ The polymeric glycan
(matriglycan) is recognized by several diagnostic monoclonal antibodies and is
necessary for the binding of laminin and other molecules to α-DG.

O-Man glycans can also play a traitorous role, because they are receptor
molecules for Lassa Virus entry into cells. This feature was cleverly
exploited to screen libraries and identify genes required for virus entry. The
method correctly identified all previously known WWS-causing genes and
predicted new culprits. So far, sixteen genes have been proven to cause a
Dystroglycanopathy ( _POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1, FKTN, FKRP, ISPD, LARGE, POMGNT2,
TMEM5, B3GALNT2, POMK, B4GAT1, GMPPB, DPM1, DPM2,_ and _DPM3_ ) of which three
( _DPM1–3_ ) are required for N-glycan and glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI)-anchor biosynthesis.

Although α-DG is the major carrier of LARGE-modified O-Man glycans, cadherins
carry O-Man glycans important for their roles in cell–cell adhesion. Clustered
protocadherins that contain O-Man glycans are regulated during brain
development and form larger oligomers. The O-Man glycans seem to orient
cadherin domains for critical interactions. O-Man in clustered protocadherins
may help explain ocular and brain malformations in disorders such as WWS.

Clinical criteria previously defined the Dystroglycanopathies, but now they
are defined by the mutated gene as mutations in genes of the pathway fit the
clinical criteria. WWS is the most severe CMD. Patients live about one year
and have multiple brain abnormalities, and severe muscular dystrophy. About
20% of patients have mutations in _POMT1_ and a few have mutations in _POMT2_.
Others have defects in _FKTN_ and _FKRP_ , but mutations in both also cause
milder forms of muscular dystrophy.

_POMGNT1_ is mutated in MEB, which is characterized by symptoms similar to,
but milder than, WWS. The most severely affected MEB patients die during the
first years of life, but the majority of mild cases survive to adulthood.
Fukuyama muscular dystrophy (FCMD) is caused by a single 3-kb
3′-retrotransposon insertional event into the _FKTN_ gene, which occurred
2000–2500 years ago. This partially reduces the stability of the mRNA, making
it a relatively mild mutation. FCMD is one of the most common types of CMD in
Japan with a carrier frequency of 1/188. _Fktn_ -null mice die by E9.5 in
embryogenesis and appear to have basement membrane defects. Congenital
muscular dystrophy type 1C (MDC1C) is a relatively mild disorder that is
caused by mutations in _FKRP_. Patients with MDC1D, a limb-girdle muscular
dystrophy, contain mutations in _LARGE_ , originally described in
myodystrophic mice ( _myd;_ now called _Large_ _myd_ ). The protein has two
glycosyltransferase signatures (DXD) in different domains that account for
xylosyl- and glucuronosyl-transferase actitivities respectively ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)).

Recessive mutations in _GNE_ cause adult-onset GNE myopathy (previously named
hereditary inclusion body myopathy type 2 (HIBM2 or Nonaka myopathy) ([Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly)). It occurs
worldwide, but one mutation (p.Met745Thr) is especially common among Persian
Jews (1:1500) and occurs in the kinase domain ([Chapter
5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). GNE mutations occur in various combinations in both
GNE enzymatic domains, and variably affect enzyme activity. The mutations
moderately reduce enzymatic activity and reduce sialylation in mouse models.
Sia is efficiently salvaged from degraded glycoproteins, but there is little
information on the cell-type preference or age-dependent contributions of the
de novo versus salvage pathways. _Gne_ -null mice die during embryogenesis and
most mice homozygous for the knockin p.Met743Thr mutation die a few days after
birth because of severe hematuria and proteinuria, not myopathy. Glomerular
abnormalities in the podocyte basement membrane result from undersialylated in
foot podocytes such as podocalyxin and nephrin. Providing _N_
-acetylmannosamine (ManNAc) to the pups in the neonatal period rescues some of
them and increases sialylation of podocalyxin and nephrin. Mutant p.Met743Thr
survivors who did not receive ManNAc after the neonatal period develop adult-
onset hyposialylation of muscle tissue, which can be rescued by oral ManNAc
therapy at adult age. Oral ManNAc is being tested as a therapy for GNE
myopathy patients, as well as for patients with primary glomerular diseases
(focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, minimal change disease, and membranous
nephropathy).

Another mouse model, carrying a transgenic _Gne_ mutation (p.Asp207Val) common
in the Japanese population, develops a pathological adult-onset muscle
phenotype involving β-amyloid deposition that precedes the accumulation of
inclusion bodies. Providing modest amounts of Sia, _N_ -acetylmannosamine or
sialyllactose to these mice prevents and even reverses muscle deterioration.
Surprisingly, sialylactose supplements are most effective. We still know
relatively little about how each of these sugars are imported into various
cells or preferentially used in glycan synthesis ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)).

A defect in O-GalNAc synthesis by a particular polypeptide GalNAc-transferase
(GALNT3) causes familial tumoral calcinosis. This severe autosomal-recessive
metabolic disorder shows phosphatemia and massive calcium deposits in the skin
and subcutaneous tissues. Mutations in the O-glycosylated fibroblast growth
factor 23 (FGF23) also cause phosphatemia, suggesting that _GALNT3_ modifies
FGF23. The rare autoimmune disease, Tn syndrome, is caused by somatic
mutations in the X-linked gene _C1GALT1C1_ , which encodes a highly specific
chaperone COSMC required for the proper folding and normal activity of the
β1-3galactosyltransferase C1GALT1 needed for synthesis of core 1 and 2
O-glycans ([Chapters 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/) and
[46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/)).

Proteoglycans and their GAG chains are critical components in extracellular
matrices. For a discussion of their biosynthesis, core proteins, and function,
see [Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/).

Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (progeroid type) is a connective tissue disorder
characterized by failure to thrive, loose skin, skeletal abnormalities,
hypotonia, and hypermobile joints, together with delayed motor development and
delayed speech. The molecular basis of the disorder is reduced synthesis of
the core region of GAGs initiated by Xyl. Galactosyltransferase I (B4GALT7)
the enzyme that adds Gal to Xyl-Ser is mutated in this disease. The activity
of galactosyltransferase II (B3GALT6), the enzyme responsible for adding the
second Gal to the core of a GAG, may also be reduced. One possible explanation
for the dual effect is that the primary mutation affects the formation or
stability of a biosynthetic complex involving several GAG biosynthetic
enzymes.

Defects in the formation of heparan sulfate (HS) cause hereditary multiple
exocytosis (HME), an autosomal-dominant disease with a prevalence of about
1:50,000 ([Table 45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly)). It
is caused by mutations in two genes _EXT1_ and _EXT2_ , which are involved in
HS synthesis. HME patients have bony outgrowths, usually at the growth plates
of the long bones. Normally, the growth plate contains chondrocytes in various
stages of development, which are enmeshed in an ordered matrix composed of
collagen and chondroitin sulfate (CS). In HME, however, the outgrowths are
often capped by disorganized cartilagenous masses with chrondrocytes in
different stages of development. About 1%–2% of patients also develop
osteosarcoma. HME mutations occur in _EXT1_ (60%–70%) and _EXT2_ (30%–40%).
The encoded proteins may form a complex in the Golgi and both are required for
polymerizing _N_ -acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)α1-4 and GlcAβ1-3 into HS.
However, the partial loss of one allele of either gene appears sufficient to
cause HME. This means that haploinsufficiency decreases the amount of HS and
that EXT activity is rate limiting for HS biosynthesis. This is unusual
because most glycan biosynthetic enzymes are in substantial excess.

The mechanism of HME pathology is likely rooted in a disruption of the normal
distribution of HS-binding growth factors, which include fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) and morphogens such as hedgehog, Wnt, and members of the
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) family. The loss of HS disrupts these
pathways in Drosophila. Mice that are null for either _Ext_ gene are embryonic
lethal and fail to gastrulate; however, _Ext_ heterozygous animals are viable,
and do not develop exostoses on the long bones, in contrast to patients with
HME. However, mice with chondrocyte-specific somatic mutations in _Ext1_ cause
a loss of heterzygosity and develop exostoses and growth abnormalities in the
growth plates of those bones. HS is required to establish and maintain the
perichondrium phenotype, and it also restrains prochondrogenic signaling
proteins including bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) that normally restrict
chondrogenesis. Without HS, chondrogenesis increases in localized areas of
actively growing cells.

Three autosomal-recessive disorders, diastrophic dystrophy (DTD),
atelosteogenesis type II (AOII), and achondrogenesis type IB (ACG-IB) result
from defective cartilage proteoglycan sulfation. These forms of
osteochondrodysplasia have various outcomes. AOII and ACG-IB are perinatal
lethal because of respiratory insufficiency, whereas DTD patients develop
symptoms only in cartilage and bone, including cleft palate, clubfeet, and
other skeletal abnormalities. Those DTD patients surviving infancy often live
a nearly normal life span. All of these disorders result from different
mutations in the DTD gene ( _SLC26A2_ ), which encodes a plasma membrane
sulfate transporter. Unlike monosaccharides, sulfate released from degraded
macromolecules in the lysosome is not salvaged well. The heavy demand for
sulfate in bone and cartilage proteoglycan synthesis probably explains why the
symptoms are most evident in these locations. Defects in the UDP-GlcA/UDP- _N_
-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) Golgi transporter (SLC35D1) cause
Schneckenbecken dysplasia. Patients have bone abnormalities similar to those
seen in other chrondrodysplasias, and a mouse model of the disease shows
similar features.

[Keratan sulfate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/keratansulfate/) I (KS-I) in
the cornea is an N-linked oligosaccharide with poly-[ _N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/) repeats
(Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3) variably sulfated at the 6-positions. Macular corneal
dystrophy (MCD), an autosomal-recessive disease, causes the cornea to become
opaque and corneal lesions to develop. Two types of MCD have been described.
MCD I appears to be due to a deficiency in sulfating the repeating units. Both
Gal and GlcNAc are sulfated in KS; sulfation of Gal and GalNAc in CS are also
affected in MCD patients.

Complete deletion of the GPI pathway in mice causes embryonic lethality. This
is not surprising because more than 150 membrane proteins require a GPI anchor
for cell surface expression ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). Hypomorphic
mutations in multiple genes in the pathway lead to a partial reduction in GPI-
anchored proteins. These include _PIGA_ , _PIGQ_ , _PIGY_ , _PIGC_ , _PIGP_ ,
_PIGL_ , _PIGW_ , _PIGM_ , _PIGV_ , and _PIGO_ in anchor assembly ([Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly)), and _PIGT_ in the
transfer of the glycan to proteins. Defects in side-chain modifications (
_PIGN_ and _PIGG_ ) and maturation of GPI following attachment to proteins (
_PGAP1_ , _PGAP2_ , and _PGAP3_ ) also cause inherited GPI deficiency but not
embryonic death. GPI deficiency has immense and variable consequences
including neurologic symptoms, particularly developmental delay/intellectual
disability and seizures, epileptic encephalopathy, progressive cerebral and/or
cerebellar atrophy, hypotonia, cortical visual impairment, sensorineural
deafness, and Hirschsprung disease. Nonneurologic phenotypes include
brachytelephalangy, anorectal anomaly, renal abnormality, cleft palate, heart
defect, and characteristic facial features such as hypertelorism, broad nasal
bridge, and tented mouth. Other symptoms such as ichthyosis, iron deposition,
hepatosplenomegaly, diaphragmatic hernia, and hepatic and/or portal vein
thrombosis were reported in small fractions of the affected individuals. It is
not easy to causally relate specific symptoms to deficiency of particular GPI-
anchored protein except for few instances. Deficiency of tissue-nonspecific
alkaline phosphatase (TNALP) accounts for seizures in some of the patients.
Death within a year after birth due to aspiration or status epilepticus is not
rare among severely affected individuals with GPI deficiency, whereas mildly
affected individuals live with GPI deficiency.

Only three disorders in GSL synthesis are known in humans. Mutations in
_ST3GAL5_ cause autosomal-recessive Amish infantile epilepsy syndrome and also
“salt-and-pepper syndrome.” This gene encodes a sialyltransferase required for
the synthesis of the ganglioside GM3 (Siaα2-3Galβ1-4Glc-ceramide) from
lactosylceramide (Galβ1-4Glc-ceramide). GM3 is also a precursor for some more
complex gangliosides. The patients' plasma glycosphingolipids (GSLs) are
nonsialylated. In contrast to the human form of the disease, mice that lack
GM3 do not have seizures or a shortened life span. However, mouse strains that
are null for the sialyltransferase and an N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
that is required for making other complex gangliosides, do develop seizures,
suggesting that it is the absence of these more complex gangliosides that may
be the underlying problem ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Mutations in
_B4GALNT1_ (also known as GM2/GD2 synthase) cause hereditary spastic
paraplegia subtype 26. These patients have developmental delays and varying
cognitive impairments with early-onset progressive spasticity owing to axonal
degeneration. Cerebellar ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, cortical atrophy, and
white-matter hyperintensities were also consistent across the disorder. A
_B4galnt1_ −/− mouse recapitulates several of the neurological characteristics
of SPG26, most prominently the progressive gait disorder

ST3GAL3 makes more complex gangliosides as well as N- and O-glycans. It is
required for the development of high cognitive functions and is mutated in
some individuals with West syndrome. An _St3gal3_ −/− mouse model also exists,
but these mice appear to have no overt neurological phenotype. GSL disorders
are difficult to identify biochemically because no convenient biomarkers
exist. Next-generation sequencing will reveal new candidates.

Early on, it was assumed that glycosylation disorders would result from
defects in glycan biosynthetic enzymes, but that perspective has changed.
Discovery of defects in Golgi organization and homeostasis, in ER chaperones
such as COSMC or EDEM, and in ER quality control have broadened the
perspective. A new defect in the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) continuum
([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)) is caused by defects in NGLY1, an enzyme
that cleaves N-glycans from misfolded glycoproteins transported into the
cytoplasm before their proteasomal degradation ([Table
45.1](/books/NBK453041/table/CH45TB1/?report=objectonly)). The defect does not
appear to induce the ERAD pathway, accumulate undegraded glycoproteins in
vesicles, or trigger autophagy. It is unclear how the defect causes symptoms
such as developmental delay, movement disorder, seizures, and a curious lack
of tear production, but their clinical similarity to other CDGs emphasizes
that glycosylation defects cannot simply be divided into “synthesis” or
“degradation.”

Phenotypic expression of the same mutation can have highly variable impact,
even among affected siblings. Explanations based on residual activity for
these “simple Mendelian disorders” are neither simple nor generally
satisfying. It is often attributed to “genetic background.” A knockout
mutation may be lethal in one highly inbred mouse strain, but not in another
because compensatory pathways may exist. Dietary and environmental impacts are
substantial as seen in MPI-CDG patients with and without oral mannose therapy.
Multiple simultaneous or sequential environmental insults may impinge on
borderline genetic insufficiencies to produce overt disease.

The authors acknowledge contribution of Bobby G. Ng and appreciate helpful
comments and suggestions from Aime Lopez Aguilar, Kekoa Taparra, Krithika
Vaidyanathan, and Shweta Varshney.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.046

Many noninherited human diseases are caused or influenced by acquired changes
in glycan synthesis or recognition. This chapter lists a few examples, their
proposed mechanisms, and a few therapies. Knowing the altered glycans or
changes in glycan-binding proteins, and whether or not they are the primary
cause, can improve diagnosis or therapies.
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) changes in cancer
and in inherited human genetic disorders are discussed separately in [Chapters
47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/) and [45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/), respectively.

Cardiovascular disorders such as stroke, myocardial infarction, and
hypovolemic shock involve temporary interruption of blood flow that need to be
fixed quickly. Natural or medical interventions restore blood flow, but
suddenly reintroducing leukocytes to the traumatized tissue also causes tissue
damage, called reperfusion injury. P-[Selectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/selectin/) on the activated endothelium in the reperfused area and/or
L-selectin on leukocytes initiate this cascade and E-selectin participates
later ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Animal models show that blocking
the initial selectin-based recognition ameliorates subsequent tissue damage.
Pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies have tried to make small-molecule
inhibitors to block these interactions in patients ([Chapters
55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/) and [57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/) also discuss
selectin inhibitors). In addition, many preparations of the already-approved
drug heparin can block P- and L-selectin interactions.

Heart attacks, strokes, and other serious diseases are associated with high
levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and decreased high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. They increase the risk of atherosclerotic
lesions in the large arteries. The earliest phase of the development of
atherosclerotic lesions (the fatty streak) involves entry of monocytes into
the subendothelial regions of the blood vessels. This process involves
expression of P- and/or E-selectin on the endothelium, which recognizes
correctly glycosylated and sulfated P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1)
or sialyl Lewis x on circulating monocytes. Indeed, P-selectin deficiency in
mice delays progression of atherosclerotic lesions, which slows even more in
combined P- and E-selectin-deficient mice. Oxidized lipids in LDL particles or
inflammatory processes may induce endothelial P-selectin in the early
atheromatous plaque. Early intervention may be possible because these lesions
develop very slowly and relatively early in life. Retention of LDLs in the
early plaque probably involves their binding to proteoglycans. This
interaction is thought to cause irreversible structural alterations of LDL,
potentiating oxidation and uptake by macrophages and smooth-muscle cells. At
the molecular level, clusters of basic amino acids in apolipoprotein B (the
protein moiety of LDL) appear to bind the negatively charged
glycosaminoglycans of proteoglycans. This binding also has a physiological
function. Heparan sulfate (HS) found in the liver sinusoids clearly regulates
the turnover of lipoprotein particles. Reduced sialylation of LDL in patients
also correlates with coronary artery disease. Although the mechanism(s) remain
unclear, desialylated LDL may be more easily taken up and incorporated into
atheromatous plaques.

The oral cavity contains numerous host and microbial glycans ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)), which cannot be fully discussed here. Dental
caries and gingivitis involve certain viridans group streptococci that have
serine-rich bacterial proteins whose stability requires O-glycosylation. They
also have a binding region that recognizes O-linked sialoglycans or oral
mucins to allow attachment to cells in the mucosa. If these bacteria reach the
bloodstream, particularly during dental procedures, the same binding proteins
recognize platelet glycoproteins such as GPIb-α, delivering the bacteria to
damaged heart valves, and leading to the serious disease of bacterial
endocarditis.

A common feature of atopic dermatitis and contact dermatitis is the entry of
leukocytes into the dermis, where they recruit other types of cells that
mediate tissue damage. Sometimes this results in the chronic expression of
E-selectin on endothelial cells. E-selectin can recruit circulating
lymphocytes carrying the cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (detected by the
antibody HECA452), which appears to be a specific E-selectin ligand epitope
carried on a subset of PSGL-1 molecules (see [Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Some T helper 1 (Th1) lymphocytes enter into the
skin via expression of the PSGL-1 ligand for P-selectin. These results were
derived from model systems and suggest potential selectin-based therapeutic
targets for future development.

Diabetes mellitus causes long-term vascular complications. One mechanism to
account for this is that high glucose increases nonenzymatic glycation,
wherein the open-chain (aldehyde) form of the glucose reacts with lysine
residues on various proteins, generating reversible Schiff bases. Irreversible
Amadori rearrangement then gradually generates adducts leading to the
“browning” (Maillard) reactions, which eventually progress to advanced
glycation end products (AGEs). The resulting protein cross-links can damage
cellular functions. The glycation adducts bind to receptors, such as the
receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) and the macrophage
scavenger receptor that may also participate in atherogenesis. Nonenzymatic
glycation should not be confused with enzymatic glycosylation, which requires
glycosyltransferases and nucleotide sugar donors.

The excess glucose in diabetes mellitus also increases production of UDP-
GlcNAc through the glucosamine:fructose aminotransferase (GFAT) pathway. This
leads to increased hyaluronan production ([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/))
as well as increased O-GlcNAc levels on nuclear and cytoplasmic glycoproteins,
which in turn alters the phosphorylation of the same proteins and their
functions ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Specific molecular mechanisms
involving such altered [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/oglcnacylation/) have been defined in animal models for complications,
such as diabetic cardiomyopathy (increased O-GlcNAcylation of various nuclear
proteins) and erectile dysfunction (O-GlcNAcylation of endothelial nitric
oxide synthase). Several cytoplasmic proteins involved in insulin receptor
signaling and the resulting nuclear transcription changes are themselves
O-GlcNAcylated and functionally altered in diabetes.

A very serious diabetic complication with high mortality is kidney
dysfunction. Initial slight urinary albumin excretion (microalbuminuria)
progresses to frank macroalbuminuria, to nephrotic syndrome, and to end-stage
renal disease. The proteinuria has been correlated with a reduction in the HS
proteoglycan content of the glomerular basement membrane. The underlying
mechanism may involve a reduction in HS synthesis by glomerular epithelial
cells that may, in turn, be caused by the high glucose in the environment. One
theory is that the resulting decrease in anionic charge and loss of HS
proteoglycan are thought to affect the porosity of the glomerular basement
membrane, although recent genetic evidence in mice questions this hypothesis.
Interestingly, high glucose also mediates increased plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) gene expression in renal glomerular mesangial cells, via
O-GlcNAc-mediated alterations in Sp1 transcriptional activity.

Numerous gastrointestinal pathogens interact with the gut mucosa via
recognition of glycan structures ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)).
Important examples are cholera toxin, which binds GM1 ganglioside, and
[_Helicobacter pylori_](/taxonomy/?term=Helicobactyer+pylori), the cause of
peptic ulcers and gastritis, which binds Lewis type glycans in the stomach
mucosa. A possible therapy is consuming soluble glycan inhibitors to block
attachment of these gut pathogens. In this regard, it is interesting that a
time-honored treatment for peptic ulcer disease (before the indentification of
_H. pylori_ ) was a combination of antacids and milk (which contains large
amounts of free sialyloligosaccharides). Indeed, the variety and high
concentrations of free glycans found in human milk (especially in the early
days after birth of the baby) do impede the ability of various gut pathogens
to bind to the infant mucosa.

Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) is the enteric loss of plasma proteins;
however, mechanisms are not well understood. Some patients with congenital
disorder of glycosylation type Ib (CDG-Ib or MPI-CDG) and CDG-Ic (ALG6-CDG)
([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)) develop PLE, suggesting involvement of
N-glycosylation. But other patients with normal N-glycosylation also develop
PLE many years following (Fontan) surgery to correct congenital heart
malformations. What causes this type of PLE? One concept is that environmental
stress such as infections increase inflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which, together with increased
venous pressure resulting from the surgery, contribute to PLE. In both the
N-glycosylation disorders and post-Fontan patients, HS is lost from the
basolateral surface of intestinal epithelial cells and returns when PLE
subsides. HS binds cytokines and its loss may increase the impact of
inflammation at the cell surface and promote leakage. Combining increased
venous pressure and cytokines along with localized HS depletion creates a
downward spiral of disease. Traditional therapy for PLE includes albumin
infusions, steroid hormones, or other anti-inflammatory drugs, but,
interestingly, heparin injections can also reduce PLE, possibly by binding to
and reducing circulating cytokines.

Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory disease typically affecting the
superficial epithelial layer of the rectum and the distal colon. The primary
cause of the disease is unknown, but both genetic and environmental factors,
such as changes in the microbiome, are involved and remissions and
exacerbations are common. Normally, colonic mucosal proteins display heavily
O-acetylated sialic acids, but these acetyl groups are lost in ulcerative
colitis. Whether this contributes to the pathology is unknown, but these
modified sialic acids are more resistant to bacterial sialidases. Some studies
suggest heparin treatments improve the symptoms, but results are still
inconclusive.

[Heparin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/heparin/) (a highly sulfated form of
HS; [Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) is primarily derived from porcine
intestines or bovine lungs. It is a fast-acting and potent anticoagulant that
is often used to avoid thrombosis, in procedures such as dialysis and open
heart surgery. Its effectiveness relies on a specific sulfated heparin
pentasaccharide that binds circulating antithrombin III and markedly enhances
its ability to inactivate coagulation Factors Xa and IIa (thrombin) ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). Animal-derived “unfractionated heparin” is now
often replaced with low-molecular-weight heparins because they have fewer
complications. One explanation is that the unfractionated heparin effects on
Factor IIa require a long chain that interacts both with the antithrombin and
with the IIa itself in a tripartite complex. In contrast, the shorter chains
found in low-molecular-weight heparins only facilitate antithrombin
inactivation of Factor Xa. Thus, low-molecular-weight heparins affect Xa but
not IIa levels. A synthetic pentasaccharide that binds and facilitates
antithrombin inactivation of Factor Xa has thus been introduced as an
alternative to heparin. Although these improvements have been valuable, it
must be kept in mind that the original unfractionated heparin has a variety of
other biological effects besides anticoagulation. Thus, other beneficial
effects of heparin, such as the blocking of P- and L-selectin, are being
reduced or even eliminated by the switch to the low-molecular-weight heparins
and the synthetic pentasaccharide.

A rare but feared complication of heparin treatment is heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. The pathogenesis appears to involve the formation of
complexes between heparin and platelet factor-4 and the generation of
antibodies against the complexes. These antibodies in turn then deposit on
platelets, causing their aggregation and loss from circulation. Somewhat
paradoxically, this process results in exaggerated thromboses, rather than
bleeding. The incidence of this complication appears to be lower with the use
of low-molecular-weight heparins, and may be absent with the use of the pure
pentasaccharide.

Sickle cell anemia is an inherited disorder of hemoglobin that leads to
various acute and chronic painful complications. Although it was the first
defined human genetic disorder, 40 years later there is still no effective
therapy. Symptoms were thought to be caused by vaso-occlusion due to
abnormally shaped and/or membrane-modified hypoxic erythrocytes. Now, it is
clear that abnormal adhesion of multiple cell types is responsible, and that
this is partially mediated by selectins. Blocking selectin action with analogs
of natural ligands such as sialyl Lewis x or heparin can restore blood flow in
a mouse model of sickle cell disease. The pan-selectin inhibitor GMI-1070 (now
rivipansel) recently showed a dramatic benefit for patients with acute pain of
sickle cell crisis, as it greatly reduced (>80%) their need for intravenous
opioid analgesics.

Blood transfusion medicine first identified the [ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/abo/) blood group system, defined by different alleles of an α-Gal(NAc)
transferase ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). These and other less
prominent glycan antigens cause hemolytic transfusion and rejection reactions,
mostly because of errors in blood typing. Efforts to generate “universal
donor” red blood cells, via enzymatic conversion of blood group A and B
antigens to the O state using bacterial enzymes, are underway.

Occasionally, patients with diseases such as cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma spontaneously secrete a circulating anticoagulant and have an
unusual coagulation test profile that makes it appear as if the patient has
been treated with heparin. The anticoagulant activity can be purified from the
plasma and has been identified as an HS glycosaminoglycan. Its source is
unknown and therapy is difficult without correcting the underlying disease or
transplanting the liver.

Plasma fibrinogen is heavily sialylated and the sialic acids are involved in
binding calcium. Certain genetic disorders of fibrinogen are known to be
associated with altered sialylation of its N-glycans, which causes altered
function in clotting. Patients with hepatomas and other liver disorders can
also sometimes manifest increased branching and/or number of N-glycans on
fibrinogen, resulting in an overall increase in sialic acid content. This can
present clinically as a bleeding disorder associated with a prolonged thrombin
time. Patients with congenital genetic disorders affecting N-glycan
biosynthesis ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)) can also have thrombotic or
bleeding disorders that are partly explained by altered glycosylation of
plasma proteins and/or platelets involved in blood coagulation.

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is an unusual form of acquired
hemolytic anemia (excessive destruction of red blood cells) that usually
appears in adults. The defect arises through a somatic mutation in bone marrow
stem cells that causes the production of one or more abnormal clones. The
defect is an inactivation of the single active copy of the _PIGA_ gene, an
X-linked locus involved in the first stage of biosynthesis of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors (for details on GPI anchor
biosynthesis, see [Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). Although several blood
cell types show abnormalities, the red cell defect is the most prominent,
being characterized by an abnormal susceptibility to the action of complement.
This is now known to be caused by the lack of expression of certain GPI-
anchored proteins, such as decay accelerating factor and CD59, that normally
down-regulate complement activation on “self” surfaces. However,
hypercoagulability also occurs, presumably because of loss of GPI-anchored
proteins on other cells, such as monocytes and platelets. Interestingly, many
of these patients had preceding, or later development of, bone marrow failure
(aplastic anemia). Some of these patients later also develop acute leukemia.
It is now known that most normal humans already have a tiny fraction of
circulating cells with a _PIGA_ mutation, the PNH defect. These presumably
represent the products of one or more bone marrow stem cells that develop this
acquired defect because of a single hit on the active X chromosome but then
did not become prominent contributors to the total pool of circulating red
blood cells. In this scenario, the independent occurrence of a process
damaging other stem cells allows the “unmasking” of the PNH defect.

Patients with the rare disorder paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria have a cold-
induced intravascular destruction of red cells (hemolysis), which appears to
be caused by a circulating IgG antibody directed against the red cell P blood
group antigens ([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Biosynthesis of the P
blood group antigens is dependent on _B3GALNT1_
(β1-3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 1) and _A4GALT_
(α1-4-galactosyltransferase) genes. The pathogenesis of this disorder is
unknown, but tends to occur in the setting of some viral infections and in
syphilis. The IgG antibody is shown by the so-called “Donath–Landsteiner
test,” in which the patient's serum is mixed either with the patient's own red
cells or with those from a normal person and chilled to 4°C. Hemolysis occurs
after warming back to 37°C.

Cold agglutinin disease is caused by autoimmune IgM antibodies directed
against glycan epitopes on erythrocytes. High titers of IgM agglutinins are
present in serum and are maximally active at 4°C. The IgMs are presumed to
bind to erythrocytes that are circulating in the cooled blood of peripheral
regions of the body. The antibody fixes complement, which then destroys the
cells when they reach warmer areas of the body. There are several variants of
the syndrome. One affects young adults and follows infection with [_Mycoplasma
pneumoniae_](/taxonomy/?term=Mycoplasma+pneumoniae) or Epstein–Barr virus
(infectious mononucleosis). This antibody is typically directed against the
so-called “i” antigen (poly-[ _N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/)), is polyclonal, and is generally short-lived,
disappearing when the infection subsides. An idiopathic variant of cold
agglutinin disease affects older individuals, involves a monoclonal IgM, and
can be a precursor or an accompaniment to a lymphoproliferative disease such
as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or other
lymphomas. These antibodies are typically directed against the “I” antigen
(β1-6-branched poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamine) present on erythrocytes. Some
less common variants of cold agglutinin disease involve antibodies directed
against sialylated _N_ -acetyllactosamines. In some patients on chronic
hemodialysis, the syndrome occurs because of the formation of antibody
directed against the sialylated blood group antigen N.

In this condition a subset of bone marrow–derived blood cells express the Tn
antigen (O-linked _N_ -acetylgalactosamine, GalNAcα-O-Ser/Thr) and sialyl-Tn
(Siaα2-6GalNAcα-O-Ser/Thr), thus becoming susceptible to hemagglutination by
naturally occurring anti-Tn antibodies that exist in most normal humans. The
underlying defect is a somatic stem cell–based loss of expression of the
O-glycan core-1 β1-3 galactosyltransferase activity (also called the T
synthase) ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). This in turn is explained by
acquired inactivation of Cosmc, a chaperone required for the biosynthesis of
the T synthase. As with PNH, the existence of the _C1GALT1C1_ gene encoding
Cosmc on the X chromosome allows a single hit on the active X chromosome to
cause a glycosylation defect in a single bone marrow stem cell. Some patients
are picked up simply because polyagglutinability of their red blood cells is
detected when blood typing is performed for a possible transfusion. Others
have varying degrees of hemolytic anemia and/or decreases in other blood cell
types. Some subsequently progress into frank leukemia. It is unclear how the
primary syndrome predisposes to development of malignancy. As with PNH, the
possibility exists that an underlying bone marrow disorder simply allows the
“unmasking” of preexisting minor stem cell clones along with the defect. In
keeping with this, leukemic clones that arise later may not have the same
defect.

IgG immunoglobulins are N-glycosylated, and those in the constant (CH2 or Fc)
region of human IgG have several unusual properties. First, they are buried
between the folds of the two constant regions. Second, the crystal structure
of the protein shows that they are immobilized by glycan–protein interactions.
Third, the IgG complex-type biantennary N-glycans are rarely fully sialylated,
and instead have one or two terminal β-linked galactose residues (termed G1
and G2, respectively). IgG from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have
even less galactose or none at all (termed G0). The severity of this
inflammatory disease tends to correlate with the level of galactosylation.
Spontaneous clinical improvement occurs during pregnancy and correlates with
restored galactosylation. One function attributed to the Fc N-glycans is to
maintain the conformation of the Fc domains as well as the hinge regions.
Other structural features are also necessary for effector functions such as
complement binding and Fc-dependent cytotoxicity. [Nuclear magnetic
resonance](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) (NMR)
studies show that the G0 N-glycans have an increased mobility resulting from
the loss of interactions between the glycan and the Fc protein surface. Thus,
it is thought that regions of the protein surface normally covered by the
glycan are exposed in rheumatoid arthritis. Some studies suggest that the
circulating mannose-binding protein recognizes the more mobile G0 N-glycan and
activates complement directly. Rheumatoid arthritis patients also have
increased circulating immune complexes consisting of antibody molecules
(called rheumatoid factor) that recognize the Fc regions of other IgG
molecules. However, the epitopes involved do not seem to be glycan-related.
Another possibility is that the altered glycosylation changes interactions
with Fc receptors. The basis of this decreased galactosylation in RA is
unknown. Some evidence points to less β-galactosyltransferase activity in
patients’ lymphocytes, but it is not known if the altered glycosylation of IgG
has a specific pathogenic role in rheumatoid arthritis, because G0 molecules
are seen in other unrelated diseases including chronic granulomatous diseases,
Crohn's disease, and tuberculosis. The glycan changes are also seen to a
lesser extent in osteoarthritis, a form of chronic degenerative arthritis with
a different pathogenesis. Overall, this observation is an interesting
phenomenon, but its significance in pathogenesis is unresolved.

Many urinary tract infections (UTIs) are caused by [_Escherichia
coli_](/taxonomy/?term=Escherichia+coli), which adhere to bladder epithelial
cells via a mannose-binding lectin, FimH, located on the F-pilus of the
bacterium. A simple, possible nonantibiotic treatment for this very common
infection is D-mannose, which competes with the bacterial glycan binding to
the urinary tract when it is excreted in the urine. Another alternative is
optimized synthetic α-mannosides, which are promising candidates to treat and
prevent UTIs.

Many pathogens initiate infection by binding to cell-surface glycans ([Chapter
37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)). Variable expression of these glycans may explain
an individual's susceptibility to infection. For example, some pathogenic
strains of _E. coli_ infect the urinary tract using a lectin that binds the P
blood group antigens, with P negative individuals being immune. The _E. coli_
P fimbriae lectins are also involved in spreading bacterial infections from
the kidney to the bloodstream.

Some pathogenic microorganisms secrete sialidases (neuraminidases), which
usually remain at the site of infection. However, in some severe cases (e.g.,
[_Clostridium perfringens_](/taxonomy/?term=Clostridium+perfringens)–mediated
gas gangrene), sialidases reach the plasma where they desialylate red cells,
resulting in enhanced clearance and anemia. Measuring plasma sialidase may aid
diagnosis and prognosis. [Sialidase](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/sialidase/)-producing [_Streptococcus
pneumoniae_](/taxonomy/?term=Streptococcus+pneumoniae) can cause hemolytic-
uremic syndrome infections and selectively inhibiting their sialidase could
have therapeutic value. On the other hand it appears that the rapid clearance
of desialylated platelets by the Ashwell–Morell receptor in the liver may
serve to protect againt unwanted disseminated intravascular coagulation.

Nephrotic syndrome occurs when the kidney glomerulus fails to retain serum
proteins during initial filtration of plasma, allowing these proteins to leak
into the urine. The epithelial/endothelial mucin molecule called podocalyxin
on the foot processes (pedicles) of glomerular podocytes helps maintain pore
integrity and excludes proteins from the glomerular filtrate. [Sialic
acids](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/sialicacids/) on podocalyxin are critical
for this function. Loss of sialic acid is seen in spontaneous minimal-change
renal disease in children and in the nephrotic syndrome that follows some
bacterial infections. Animal models seem to mimic this situation with
proteinuria and renal failure developing in a dose-dependent manner after a
single injection of [_Vibrio cholerae_](/taxonomy/?term=Vibrio+cholerae)
sialidase, which correlated with loss of sialic acids from the glomerulus.
This was accompanied by effacement of foot processes and the alteration of
tight junctions between podocytes. The anionic charge returned to endothelial
and epithelial sites within two days, but the foot process loss remained.
Another model is aminonucleoside nephrosis, induced in rats by injection of
puromycin. Again, defective sialylation of podocalyxin and glomerular
glycosphingolipids is seen in this model. A genetic mouse model with impaired
sialic acid synthesis (UDP- _N_ -acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/ _N_
-acetylmannosamine kinase [GNE] deficiency) dies soon after birth because of
kidney dysfunction and undersialylated podocalyxin.

In humans, only IgA1 and IgD immunoglobulins contain O-glycans in the hinge
regions, whereas all other immunoglobulin classes contain N-glycans in the Fc
domain. Aggregation of the IgA1 molecule causes glomerulonephritis called IgA
nephropathy. Studies of the O-glycans on serum IgA1 showed glycan truncations
in the IgA nephropathy group compared with a negative control group. The IgA1
O-glycan chains are thought to stabilize the three-dimensional structure of
the molecule. Studies of heat-induced aggregation support the notion that the
altered glycosylation results in a loss of conformational stiffness, perhaps
explaining the aggregation phenomenon. It appears that underglycosylation of
the IgA1 molecule in IgA nephropathy is involved in the nonimmunologic
glomerular accumulation of IgA1. The primary mechanism of underglycosylation
remains unknown. One scenario is a defect in the _C1GALT1C1_ gene encoding
Cosmc, similar to that found in the Tn polyagglutinability syndrome (see
above). Instead of affecting a bone marrow stem cell, the defect would
presumably involve a clone of B cells that specifically expresses IgA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder in which
antigen–antibody complexes accumulate in various organs, especially the skin
and kidney. How SLE begins is unknown, but the pathology may involve both
cytokines and HS. HS is reduced on the glomerular basement membrane, and this
was thought to result from masking of HS by complexes of nucleosomes and
antinuclear antibodies, but the actual situation is likely to be more complex.
Even though anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies are the hallmark of SLE,
circulating antibodies to HS strongly correlate with disease activity. In some
studies, HS injections into dogs induce SLE symptoms within several weeks, and
elevated HS is found in the urine of SLE patients, especially in severe cases.
Some SLE patients also develop protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), perhaps as a
consequence of misplaced or degraded HS and elevated cytokines, creating the
appropriate environment for PLE (see above).

A variety of diseases are associated with circulating antibodies directed
against specific glycan molecules enriched in the nervous system, resulting in
autoimmune neural damage. Such antibodies can arise via distinct pathogenic
mechanisms. In the first situation, patients with benign or malignant B-cell
neoplasms (e.g., benign monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance [MGUS],
Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, or plasma cell myeloma) secrete monoclonal
IgM or IgA antibodies that are specific for either gangliosides or, more
commonly, for sulfated glucuronosyl glycans (the so-called HNK-1 epitope).
These antibodies react with glycolipids bearing the epitope
3-O-SO3-GlcAβ1-4Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4Glc-Cer
(3′sulfoglucuronosylparagloboside) and against the N-glycans on a variety of
central nervous system (CNS) glycoproteins (MAG, P0, L1, N-CAM) that bear the
same terminal sequence. The resulting peripheral demyelinating neuropathy can
sometimes be more damaging than the primary disease itself. Therapy consists
of attempts to treat the primary disease with chemotherapy or to remove the
immunoglobulin by plasmapheresis. Both approaches are usually unsuccessful at
lowering the immunoglobulin to a level sufficiently to diminish the symptoms.
The second situation is an immune reaction to molecular mimicry of neural
ganglioside structures by the lipooligosaccharides of bacteria such as
[_Campylobacter jejuni_](/taxonomy/?term=Campylobacter+jejuni). Following an
intestinal infection with such organisms, circulating cross-reacting
antibodies against gangliosides such as GM1 and GQ1b appear in the plasma.
These are associated with the onset of symptoms of peripheral demyelinating
neuropathy involving the peripheral or cranial nerves (the Guillain–Barré and
Miller Fisher syndromes, respectively). The third situation is a human-induced
disease arising from attempts to treat patients with stroke using intravenous
injections of mixed bovine brain gangliosides. Although some evidence for
benefits was seen, several cases of Guillain–Barré syndrome were reported as a
likely side effect. One explanation is that the presence of small amounts of
gangliosides with the nonhuman sialic acid, _N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid
(Neu5Gc) facilitates formation of antibodies that cross-react with
gangliosides containing the human sialic acid Neu5Ac.

Alzheimer's disease is a common primary degenerative dementia of humans, with
an insidious onset and a progressive course. The ultimate diagnosis is made by
postmortem histological examination of brain tissue, which shows
characteristic amyloid plaques with neurofibrillary tangles that are
associated with neuronal death. Several types of glycans have been implicated
in the histopathogenesis of the lesions: O-GlcNAc and HS glycosaminoglycans.
Paired helical filaments are major component of the neurofibrillary tangle.
These are primarily composed of the microtubule-associated protein Tau, which
is present in an abnormally hyperphosphorylated state. This
hyperphosphorylated Tau no longer binds microtubules and self-assembles to
form the paired helical filaments that may contribute to neuronal death.
Normal brain Tau is known to be multiply modified by Ser(Thr)-linked O-GlcNAc,
the dynamic and abundant posttranslational modification that is often
reciprocal to Ser(Thr) phosphorylation ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)).
The hypothesis currently being investigated is that site-specific or
stoichiometric changes in O-GlcNAc addition may modulate Tau function and may
also play a part in the formation of paired helical filaments by allowing
excessive phosphorylation. Inhibitors of O-GlcNAcase that cross the blood-
brain barrier are now in clinical trials.

HS proteoglycans may also have an important role in amyloid plaque deposition
as investigators have shown high-affinity binding between HS proteoglycans and
the amyloid precursor, as well as with the A4 peptide derived from the
precursor. In addition, a specific vascular HS proteoglycan found in senile
plaques bound with high affinity to two amyloid protein precursors. Further
studies are needed. Recently, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) showed a
strong correlation between Alzheimer's disease and the higher expression of a
form of CD33 (Siglec-3) that is expressed in brain microglia and may be
suppressing clearance of amyloid.

Altered glycosylation is a universal feature of cancer cells, but only certain
specific glycan changes are frequently associated with tumors (for details,
see [Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). Findings include (1) increased
β1-6GlcNAc branching of N-glycans; (2) changes in the amount, linkage, and
acetylation of sialic acids; (3) truncation of O-glycans, leading to
expression of Tn and sialyl Tn antigens; (4) expression of the nonhuman sialic
acid, Neu5Gc, incorporated from dietary sources; (5) expression of sialylated
Lewis structures and selectin ligands; (6) altered expression and enhanced
shedding of glycosphingolipids; (7) increased expression of galectins and
poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamines; (8) altered expression of ABH(O) blood-group-
related structures; (9) alterations in sulfation of glycosaminoglycans; (10)
increased expression of hyaluronan; (11) increased expression of the enzyme
that attaches GPI anchors to proteins; and (12) increased
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) on many
proteins. Some of these changes have been shown to have pathophysiological
significance in model tumor systems, and some are targets for diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches to cancer.

Asthma is characterized by sporadic recurrent hyperresponsiveness of the
tracheobronchial tree to various stimuli, resulting in widespread narrowing of
the airways. The two dominant pathological features are airway wall
inflammation and luminal obstruction of the airways by inflammatory exudates,
consisting predominantly of mucins. Most cases are due to antigen-specific IgE
antibodies, which bind to mast cells as well as to basophils and certain other
cell types. Antigens can cross-link adjacent IgE molecules, triggering an
explosive release of vasoactive, bronchoactive, and chemotactic agents from
mast cell granules into the extracellular milieu. Eosinophils also contribute
to the pathogenesis of asthma in several ways, by synthesizing leukotrienes,
stimulating histamine release from mast cells and basophils, providing a
positive feedback loop, and releasing major basic protein, a granule-derived
protein that has toxic effects on the respiratory epithelium. Underlying all
this, it appears that CD4+ Th2 cells are responsible for orchestrating the
responses of other cell types. Recent evidence indicates that the selectins
are intimately involved in recruitment of eosinophils and basophils (and
possibly T lymphocytes) into the lung, raising the hope that small-molecule
inhibitors of selectin function and/or heparin can be used to treat the early
stages of an asthmatic attack. Likewise, chemokine interactions with HS are
important in leukocyte trafficking. Evidence from Siglec-F knockout mice also
indicates that the functionally equivalent human paralog Siglec-8 is a good
target for reducing the contributions of eosinophils to the pathology
([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)). Finally, the large increase in mucus
production is at least partly mediated by an up-regulation of synthesis of
mucin polypeptides, under the influence of various cytokines that stimulate
the goblet cells of the airway epithelium.

Shock, trauma, or sepsis can all cause acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Diffuse pulmonary endothelial injury causes pulmonary edema because of
increased capillary permeability. Selectins and integrins help arrest
neutrophils on the injured endothelium where they release injurious oxidants,
proteolytic enzymes and arachidonic acid metabolites, resulting in endothelial
cell dysfunction and destruction. Bronchoalveolar lavage is rich in
neutrophils and their secreted products documenting the inflammatory response.
Here again, giving small molecule selectin inhibitors and/or heparin before
serious lung damage and respiratory failure is a possible therapy.

Cystic fibrosis is a common genetic disorder caused by a mutation in the
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( _CFTR_ ). This causes
defective chloride conduction across the apical membrane of involved
epithelial cells. Cystic fibrosis is associated with increased accumulation of
viscous mucins in the pancreas, gut, and lungs, which leads to many symptoms
of the disease. There are known to be widespread increases in sialylation,
sulfation, and fucosylation of mucin glycoproteins. One possible explanation
is that the primary CFTR defect allows a higher Golgi pH, resulting in
abnormalities in glycosylation: however, there is controversy about this
conclusion. Curiously, the CFTR is mainly expressed within nonciliated
epithelial cells, duct cells, and serous cells of the tubular glands, but not
highly expressed in the goblet cells and mucous glands of the acinar cells,
which are the cells that synthesize respiratory mucins. Thus, the _CFTR_
mutation may indirectly affect mucin glycosylation through the generation of
inflammatory responses and/or changes in pH or chloride secretion. Another
major cause of morbidity in the disease is the colonization of respiratory
epithelium by an alginate-producing form of [_Pseudomonas
aeruginosa_](/taxonomy/?term=Pseudomonas+aeruginosa). Certain glycolipids and
mucin glycans have been suggested to be the _Pseudomonas_ receptors that help
to maintain the colonization. The changes in glycolipid and mucin
glycosylation could enhance production of potential binding targets for organ
colonization by the bacteria. The presence of bacterial products is also a
proinflammatory condition, because the bacterial capsular polysaccharides may
activate Toll-like receptors and lead eventually to neutrophil accumulation
and organ damage.

Pulmonary vascular diseases (PVDs) include pulmonary embolism, pulmonary
arterial hypertension (PAH), and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). These
diseases increase pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and pulmonary arterial
pressure (PAP), ultimately leading to right ventricular hypertrophy and heart
failure. PAH is the best studied—a progressive disease that shows nitric oxide
deficiency, vasoconstriction, in situ thrombosis, and enhanced vascular
remodeling. Among other factors, dysregulated glucose metabolism may drive an
increased flux into the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway. This results in PAH
patients having increased hyaluronan in lung tissue, plasma, and pulmonary
arterial smooth muscle cells. It also increases O-GlcNAc modified proteins a
process shown to regulate pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cell proliferation
associated with PAH progression, suggesting a potential therapeutic target.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Merrina
Anugraham, Jarrod W. Barnes, Philip Gordts, and Heinz Läubli.

Because of the wide range of topics covered in this chapter, it is not
feasible to provide literature citations for all of them. Some examples are
provided but the reader should consult references at the end of the other
cited chapters.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.047

Altered glycosylation is a universal feature of cancer cells, and certain
glycans are well-known markers of tumor progression. This chapter discusses
glycan biosynthetic pathways that are frequently altered in cancer cells;
correlations between altered glycosylation, diagnosis, and clinical prognosis;
the genetic bases of some of these changes; and studies indicating their
pathological importance.

The earliest evidence of altered glycosylation as a hallmark of cancer was
that some plant lectins show enhanced binding and agglutination of tumor
cells. Next, it was found that transformation of cultured cells is frequently
accompanied by a general increase in the size of radiolabeled glycopeptides of
cell-surface glycoproteins. With the advent of monoclonal antibody technology,
many “tumor-specific” antibodies directed against glycan epitopes were found,
especially those borne on glycolipids. In many cases, these epitopes
represented “onco-fetal antigens”—that is, glycan epitopes expressed on tumor
cells and embryonic tissues. Like normal cells during embryogenesis, tumor
cells undergo rapid growth, adhere to other cells and cell matrices, and
invade tissues. Correlations between certain types of altered glycosylation
and the prognosis of tumor-bearing animals or patients increased interest in
glycan changes. In vitro cellular assays and in vivo animal studies have now
supported the conclusion that glycan changes are critical to several aspects
of tumor cell behavior. This chapter outlines the most common tumor-associated
glycan changes in relation to biosynthetic mechanisms and their relevance to
cancer.

[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) changes in malignant cells take
a variety of forms: loss of expression or excessive expression of certain
glycans, increased expression of incomplete or truncated glycans, and, less
commonly, the appearance of novel glycans. However, this is not simply the
random consequence of disordered biosynthesis in tumor cells. It is striking
that a very limited subset of changes are frequently correlated with malignant
transformation and tumor progression. Given that cancer is a
“microevolutionary” process in which only the fittest cells survive, it is
likely that these specific glycan changes are selected for during tumor
progression.

Classic reports of increased size of tumor cell glycopeptides have now been
partly explained by an increase in β1-6 branching of N-glycans ([Figure
47.1](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f1/?report=objectonly)), which results from
enhanced expression of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (GlcNAc-TV, GnT-V,
MGAT5) ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Increased transcription of the
_MGAT5_ gene is induced by various oncogenic transcription factors, as well as
viral- and chemical-induced carcinogenesis. Cells with increased MGAT5
expression show an increased frequency of metastasis in mice, and spontaneous
revertants lacking MGAT5 lose the metastatic phenotype. Some human tumors show
increased staining with the plant lectin L-phytohemagglutinin (L-PHA)
([Chapter 48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)), which preferentially recognizes
branched N-glycans induced by MGAT5. Overexpression of _Mgat5_ cDNA in
cultured cells causes a transformed phenotype (i.e., colony formation in soft
agar, increased cell spreading, enhanced invasiveness through membranes, and
ability to form tumors in immunocompromised mice). Most convincingly, _Mgat5_
-deficient mice show a striking reduction in the growth and metastasis of
mammary tumors induced by a viral oncogene. Likewise, metabolic inhibition of
N-glycan synthesis by the plant alkaloid swainsonine (which blocks
α-mannosidase II [MAN2A1], thereby preventing complete processing of N-glycans
and preventing addition of the β1-6 GlcNAc branch; [Chapter
55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)) inhibits tumor formation. Increased expression of
MGAT4 to form a β1-4 branched tetra-antennary N-glycan also enhances tumor
progression. Possible mechanisms by which increased N-glycan branching and
extension enhances progression include lattice formation via galectin binding
to poly- _N_ -acetyllactosamines (LacNAc) leading to prolonged growth-factor
signaling, and the generation of sialyl Lewis x (SLex) recognized by selectins
because of increased outer-chain fucosylation ([Figure
47.1](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f1/?report=objectonly)). Increased
expression of FUT8 that transfers the core Fuc to N-glycans ([Figure
47.1](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f1/?report=objectonly)) is also observed in
solid tumors and promotes tumor progression in lung cancer cells. In contrast,
enhanced expression of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III (GlcNAc-TIII, GnT-
III, MGAT3) and the bisecting GlcNAc ([Figure
47.1](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f1/?report=objectonly)), observed in rat
hepatomas and mouse mammary tumors, suppresses tumor progression and
metastasis. Mice lacking MGAT3 show increased mammary tumors and lung
metastases, and high MGAT3 expression correlates with better relapse-free
survival in human breast cancer. However, liver tumors are reduced in mice
lacking MGAT3. Thus, the effects of MGAT3 on cancer progression depend on
tissue context.

Overexpression of mucins in carcinomas was first observed in classic studies
of episialin (now known as MUC1) on mouse tumor cells. Mucins are large
glycoproteins that carry many O-GalNAc glycans on Ser or Thr in tandem repeat
regions ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). In normal polarized epithelium,
mucins are expressed exclusively in the apical membrane, facing the lumen of a
hollow organ, and soluble mucins are secreted exclusively into the lumen. Loss
of adhesion junctions and topology in malignant epithelial cells destroys
polarization, allowing soluble mucins to enter the extracellular space and the
blood. The rod-like structure of mucins and their negative charge are thought
to repel intercellular interactions and sterically inhibit other adhesion
molecules such as cadherins and integrins from carrying out their functions.
Thus, in some instances, mucins may act as “antiadhesins” that can also
promote displacement of a cell from the primary tumor during the initiation of
metastasis. Tumor mucins bearing selectin ligands facilitate several aspects
of cancer progression (see below). Evidence suggests that they might also
physically block interactions between blood-borne carcinoma cells and host
cytolytic cells such as natural killer cells. In addition, mucins may mask
presentation of antigenic peptides by major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules.

A hallmark abnormal feature of carcinoma mucins is their incomplete
glycosylation, leading to the expression of Tn and T antigens ([Figure
47.2](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f2/?report=objectonly)). Secreted mucins
expressing T, Tn, or sialyl-Tn (STn) often appear in the bloodstream of
patients with cancer. Because these glycans occur infrequently in normal
tissues, they provoke immune responses in the patient, which may be of use
both prognostically and therapeutically. Clinical trials to deliberately
provoke or enhance such immune responses are underway. Importantly, the best
immune responses are elicited by the truncated glycans presented in arrays,
exactly as on the mucins. The appearance of excessive Tn and STn on tumor
cells has been shown in some instances to be correlated with silencing of the
COSMC gene (C1GALT1C1). The β1-3 galactosyltransferase (C1GALT1) that
synthesizes Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-Ser/Thr requires the chaperone C1GALT1C1 for
activity. The gene for C1GALT1C1 is on the X chromosome, so a single mutation
may be sufficient to eliminate expression. In other instances, STn
accumulation results from overexpression of the sialyltransferase ST6GALNAC1
([Figure 47.2](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f2/?report=objectonly)). The
expression of Tn and STn can enhance tumorigenic and invasive properties.

Early observations of wheat germ agglutinin binding to animal tumor cells are
likely explained by an overall increase in cell-surface sialic acid (Sia),
which binds factor H to limit complement activation, engages inhibitory
[Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/siglecs/) ([Chapter
35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)) to suppress innate immune responses, and reduces
attachment of tumor cells to the matrix, facilitating metastasis. Increases in
α2-6 Sia on outer LacNAc units by up-regulation of _ST6GAL1_ enhances tumor
progression by multiple mechanisms, including suppression of
galectin-3-induced apoptosis, up-regulation of integrin activity, focal
adhesion activity and cell motility, suppression of Fas death receptor
functions, and generation of resistance to certain chemotherapeutic agents.
However, α2-6 Sia may also inhibit epidermal growth factor (EGF) binding to
the EGF receptor and thereby inhibit tumor progression. There can also be
changes in Sia modifications in tumor cells. Sia 9-O-acetylation can be
increased (e.g., 9-O-acetylated GD3 [[Figure
47.3](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f3/?report=objectonly)] in melanoma cells)
or decreased (e.g., on the O-glycans of colon carcinomas). Some tumor cells
express small amounts of de-N-acetyl (deNAc) gangliosides ([Figure
47.3](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f3/?report=objectonly)). O-Acetylation of
gangliosides appears to protect tumor cells from apoptosis, and de-N-
acetylgangliosides may stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGF receptor.

Many years ago, patients with cancer were reported to express
“Hanganutziu–Deicher” antibodies, which agglutinated animal red blood cells
and were later shown to be directed against gangliosides carrying the nonhuman
sialic acid N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), which was also found in human
tumors. This unusual phenomenon has now been explained by the metabolic
incorporation of diet-derived Neu5Gc into human glycans ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). This Sia differs from the usual human Sia,
Neu5Ac, by addition of a single oxygen atom ([Figure
47.3](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f3/?report=objectonly)). Humans show
variable levels of circulating antibodies against Neu5Gc-containing epitopes.
The resulting weak immune response can promote tumor growth by enhancing
chronic inflammation and angiogenesis. Given this selective advantage, it is
not surprising that tumor cells are better at accumulating Neu5Gc in the face
of an increased immune response. Because the primary dietary source of Neu5Gc
is red meat (muscle from mammals), this may help explain consistent reports of
increased cancer risk for those who consume red meat.

SLex and sialyl-Lewis a (SLea) glycan epitopes ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)) were first identified as tumor antigens on
glycosphingolipids. Expression of these antigens by epithelial carcinomas
correlates with metastatic potential in mice and tumor progression, metastatic
spread, and poor prognosis in humans. SLex and SLea epitopes on ligand
glycoproteins are key recognition determinants of the selectins ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). Indeed, selectin ligands are also expressed on
carcinoma cells, and mucin-like tumor antigens carrying SLex and SLea are
found in the blood of carcinoma patients ([Figure
47.4](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f4/?report=objectonly)). Transgenic
overexpression of E-selectin in mouse liver redirects syngeneic carcinoma
cells that normally colonize the lung to liver, and metastasis is attenuated
in mice lacking P-selectin or L-selectin. [Selectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/selectin/) interactions also help explain the classic observation that
cancer cells entering the bloodstream form thromboemboli with platelets and
leukocytes, which facilitate arrest in the vasculature, assist extravasation
through the endothelium, and help in evasion of the immune system. Indeed, the
aberrant entry of tumor mucins with selectin ligands into the circulation can
help explain some forms of “Trousseau's syndrome,” in which thrombotic
phenomena precede the eventual diagnosis of an occult tumor. Of practical
relevance is the finding that the glycosaminoglycan heparin ([Chapter
17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) is a potent inhibitor of P- and L-selectin
interactions, and this is consistent with reports of benefits of heparin
therapy in cancer and cancer-associated thrombosis. Another therapeutic
strategy involves small-molecule inhibitors of selectin ligand formation
([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)).

Loss of AB blood group expression in the context of carcinoma (accompanied by
exposure of underlying H and Ley epitopes) ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)) is associated with poor prognosis in several
studies. The Sda (or Cad) antigen, a blood group glycan abundantly expressed
in the colon, is lost in colon carcinoma. Sulfation of the C-3 position of
terminal Gal residues is also reduced in cancers. Sialyl-6-sulfo Lewis x and
disialyl Lewis a, expressed on colonic epithelial cells, are reduced in colon
cancer cells. These changes may reflect the enhanced production of SLex and
SLea in cancers. DNA methylation and histone deacetylation, epigenetic
mechanisms for suppression of gene transcription commonly observed in cancers,
are proposed to underlie these glycan alterations. There are also rare
instances in which a tumor may present a “forbidden” blood group structure
(i.e., expression of a B blood group antigen in an A-positive patient)
([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). Regardless of the underlying mechanism,
tumor regression has been noted in a few such cases, presumably mediated by
the naturally occurring endogenous antibodies directed against the foreign
structure. The appearance of P antigen in cancers of rare P blood type
individuals is another example.

Many of the “tumor-specific” monoclonal antibodies raised against cancer cells
recognize the glycan portion of glycosphingolipids. Some glycolipids are
highly enriched in specific cancers (e.g., Gb3/CD77 in Burkitt's lymphoma and
GM3, GD2, and GD3 in melanomas) ([Figure
47.3](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f3/?report=objectonly)). Several types of
tumors (particularly melanoma and neuroblastoma) are characterized by the
synthesis of very high levels of gangliosides ([Chapter
11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Some of these (e.g., GD2) are not normally found
at high levels in extraneural tissues and are therefore targets for both
passive immunotherapy (monoclonal antibody infusion) and active immunotherapy
(immunization with purified glycolipids). In some cases, gangliosides are also
major carriers of modified Sias ([Figure
47.3](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f3/?report=objectonly)). Studies in cell
culture suggest that some gangliosides promote cell growth. In contrast,
strong immunosuppressive effects observed in vivo correlate with large
quantities of gangliosides “shed” by some tumors.

A complete loss of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins is
seen in some cases of malignant and premalignant states involving the
hematopoietic system. This results from acquired mutations in hematopoietic
stem cells in the _PIGA_ gene (required for an early step in GPI-anchor
biosynthesis ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). The _PIGA_ gene is on the
X chromosome (Xp22.1). GPI-anchored proteins are lost in the progeny of a
single hematopoietic stem cell-mutant clone. This clone often gradually
replaces healthy cells, giving rise to a syndrome called paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria or PNH ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). Although the
mutation itself does not confer a malignant phenotype, the presence of such an
affected clone is sometimes a harbinger of leukemia.

Many classes of malignant tumors express high levels of hyaluronan, a very
large negatively charged polysaccharide composed of the repeating disaccharide
unit [GlcAβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-4]n ([Chapter 16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). In
carcinomas, hyaluronan is usually enriched in tumor-associated stroma (i.e.,
connective tissue, immune cells, and blood vessels). This stroma is more or
less prominent depending on tumor type; for example, it is usually prominent
in breast cancer. However, hyaluronan is also localized around the tumor cell
surface. In normal tissues, hyaluronan serves at least three functions, which
may also contribute to tumor progression. First, it increases levels of tissue
hydration, which can facilitate movement of cells through tissues. Second, it
is intrinsic to the assembly of extracellular matrices through specific
interactions with other macromolecules, and thus it participates in tumor
cell–matrix interactions that facilitate or inhibit tumor cell survival and
invasion. Finally, hyaluronan interacts with several types of cell-surface
receptors, especially CD44, which mediate or modify cell signaling pathways.
These interactions, notably with alternatively spliced isoforms of CD44 that
are elevated in most cancer cells, are often crucial to tumor malignancy and
are a current target for novel therapies.

In normal adult tissues, hyaluronan appears to be relatively inert with
respect to cell signaling and behavior. However, a very high molecular weight
form of hyaluronan found in the naked mole rat, can inhibit spontaneous tumor
formation. In addition, during embryonic development, tissue healing, and
regeneration, and in various pathologies, hyaluronan-CD44 signaling becomes
activated, possibly because of limited cleavage of hyaluronan by
hyaluronidases. The consequences of this signaling are dramatic because they
are essential to, or promote, proliferation, survival, epithelial–mesenchymal
transition (EMT), and invasion, which are also key elements of the malignant
phenotype ([Figure 47.5](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f5/?report=objectonly)).
[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/)–CD44 interaction at the
tumor cell surface is required for the constitutive activation of some well-
known oncogenes, especially receptor tyrosine kinases such as _ErbB2_ , which
is amplified or mutated in a large number of carcinomas. Accordingly,
hyaluronan–CD44 interaction promotes downstream intracellular pathways that
are also hallmarks of cancer, such as the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Antagonists of
hyaluronan–CD44 interaction cause inactivation of these pathways in malignant
cells in culture and inhibit tumor growth and metastasis in animal models.
Hyaluronan–CD44 interaction also stimulates multidrug resistance, and
antagonists sensitize resistant cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs.
Evidently, stimulation of receptor tyrosine kinase activities by hyaluronan
leads to increased PI3K levels, which in turn stimulate new hyaluronan
synthesis, thus setting up a positive feedback loop that amplifies
antiapoptotic pathways. In addition, interactions of hyaluronan with its
receptors are important for the activities of several types of multidrug
transporters and metabolic transporters. These widespread effects may be due
to stabilization of signaling platforms in the plasma membrane (e.g., lipid
rafts) that are dependent on multivalent interactions of hyaluronan with CD44
or, in some cases, with another hyaluronan receptor (e.g., LYVE-1 or
RHAMM/CD168) ([Figure
47.5](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f5/?report=objectonly)). Consequently,
hyaluronan–receptor interactions are an important therapeutic target in
cancer.

Proteoglycans comprise core proteins that are decorated with covalently
attached, negatively charged, sulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side
chains—namely, chondroitin sulfate (CS), dermatan sulfate (DS), keratan
sulfate (KS), and heparan sulfate (HS) ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).
Although the content and distribution of many proteoglycans are altered during
tumorigenesis, only HS side chains of proteoglycans have been implicated in
tumor pathogenesis in a convincing manner. HS chains vary with respect to
number and location of sulfate groups. HS chains are covalently linked to the
core protein of proteoglycans (e.g., syndecans, glypicans, and perlecan).
Other proteoglycans such as decorin, biglycan, versican and lumican, carrying
CS, DS, or KS chains are also present in most tissues, including many tumor
types.

Major functions of HS proteoglycans relevant to tumor formation are to promote
cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions important in tissue assembly and to
bind a wide array of bioactive factors such as fibroblast growth factor-2
(FGF-2), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), hepatocyte growth factor,
WNT, and numerous other cytokines and chemokines. Thus, HS proteoglycans can
serve to build either inhibitory barriers or permissive pathways for cell
invasion and can either sequester factors away from their receptors or present
them efficaciously to those receptors ([Figure
47.5](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f5/?report=objectonly)). Syndecan-1 well
illustrates the multiple important roles of HS, especially in promoting
metastasis and angiogenesis. Early work suggested that syndecan-1 helps
maintain the normal differentiated state of epithelia and that low levels of
tumor-associated syndecan-1 correlate with malignancy. Recent work highlights
the importance of enzymatic processing by proteases and heparanase, an enzyme
that cleaves the HS chains at specific sites. High levels of proteolytically
shed HS-rich ectodomain of syndecan-1 are present in sera of patients with
myeloma as well as some types of carcinoma and predicts poor prognosis. High
levels of syndecan-1 ectodomain also accumulate in the tumor microenvironment,
where they play an important role in activation of chemokine and growth factor
signaling and consequently tumor cell behavior. Especially significant is the
finding that ectodomains promote metastasis to bone tissue, which is
characteristic of myeloma and certain carcinomas (e.g., of breast or prostate)
in human patients. The mechanism of ectodomain shedding appears to involve
members of the matrix metalloproteinase and ADAM protease families.

HS side chains of several HS proteoglycans are cleaved to fragments containing
10 to 20 sugar moieties by vertebrate heparanase and endo-β-glucuronidase.
Heparanase is elevated in numerous types of cancer, and increased heparanase
activity can lead to induction of angiogenesis and metastasis. HS cleavage
promotes blood vessel remodeling required for angiogenesis and release of HS-
bound angiogenic factors, growth factors, and chemokines. In addition,
heparanase products are more bioactive compared with intact HS proteoglycan.
The removal of sulfate moieties from HS by endosulfatases also amplifies
growth factor activities and tumor growth. These studies have led to increased
interest in HS and its modifying enzymes as therapeutic targets in cancers.

O-GlcNAc levels regulated by the O-GlcNAc transferase OGT and the
hexosaminidase OGA have been found to be elevated in many cancers. Increased
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) leads to
enhanced cancer cell metabolism due to alterations in the stability or
activity of transcription factors and kinases. Specific examples of proteins
modified by O-GlcNAc which are directly implicated in cancer progression
include c-Myc, cyclin D1, NF-κB/p65, PFK1, and SNAIL.

The Cancer [Genome](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/genome/) Atlas (TCGA) has
identified many alterations in the expression of glycosylation genes that
correlate with cancers. The mechanistic basis is known in some cases. Thus,
transcription of _MGAT5_ ([Figure
47.1](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f1/?report=objectonly)) is induced by v-
_src_ , H- _ras_ , and v- _fps_ and the transcription factor _ets-1_. Another
example is enhanced expression of SLex on adult T-cell leukemia cells, which
show extremely strong tissue infiltrative activity, likely mediated by
selectins. The transcriptional activator protein Tax of HTLV-1, which causes
leukemia, activates transcription of the _FUT7_ gene, which encodes the
fucosyltransferase that generates SLex in leukocytes. Under the hypoxic
conditions found in advanced tumors, hypoxia-resistant cancer cells survive by
up-regulating the transcription factor, hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). HIF
induces transcription of several glycosylation genes, leading to altered
glycans, including enhanced SLex and SLea expression in cancer cells. Tumor
hypoxia may also affect the expression of Neu5Gc in human tumor cells by up-
regulating transcription of the lysosomal sialin Sia transporter. Down-
regulation of glycosylation genes by DNA methylation or histone
deacetylation/trimethylation may silence glycosylation genes that suppress
tumor progression like _MGAT3_ or _ST6GAL1_. Posttranscriptional regulation of
glycosylation pathways through microRNAs is also involved in tumor
progression. For instance, miR-30b/30d are known to promote the metastatic
behavior of melanoma cells by targeting the GalNAc transferase GALNT7.

Cancer stem cells, or tumor-initiating cells, are the small subpopulation of
cancer cells that has the ability to initiate tumors. Several glycans that are
specific markers for embryonic stem cells (stage-specific embryonic antigen-3
[SSEA-3], SSEA-3 with fucose [Globo H], and SSEA-4) are also expressed by
cancer stem cells. SSEA-1, an embryonic stem cell marker in mice, is found in
cancer stem cells in human gliomas. Thus the expression of these glycans
appear to be associated with the “stemness” of cells. The hyaluronan receptor,
CD44, is also a marker of cancer stem cells and is functionally important for
their properties.

Cancer stem cells are often investigated in the context of EMT. Cells that
have undergone EMT are highly similar to cancer stem cells. EMT is a critical
event in tumor progression that prepares cancer cells for metastasis. It is
governed by several well-defined transcription factors such as SNAIL and ZEB.
Specific changes of glycan expression are known to occur on EMT of human
cancer cells, including appearance of GD1 ganglioside, and decreased
expression of Gg4 and GM2 glycolipids. Expression of known tumor-associated
glycans, such as β1,6-GlcNAc branched N-glycans, SLex and SLea, is also
enhanced in cancer cells undergoing EMT.

Several glycan antigens are used for detecting and monitoring the growth
status of tumors. CA19-9 or SLea is a cancer antigen and was discovered in
serum of patients with colon or pancreatic cancers. It is used primarily to
monitor pancreatic tumors. CA125 recognizes the mucin MUC16 and is used in
monitoring ovarian cancer. Truncated O-GalNAc glycans Tn, STn, and T ([Figure
47.2](/books/NBK453023/figure/ch47.f2/?report=objectonly)) attached to MUC16
from cancer cells enhance the specificity of diagnosis and monitoring of
ovarian cancer. SLex-related glycans in lung and breast cancers can be used to
monitor residual disease after surgery. In liver cancer, the core fucose on
N-glycans can facilitate early diagnosis. In recent times, the failure of
proteomics to deliver reliable cancer biomarkers has rekindled interest in
glycomic profiling of serum and other body fluid glycoproteins. Classic
findings of glycan-specific antibodies associated with cancer, such as the
antibodies against the nonhuman Sia, Neu5Gc, are also being reinvestigated.
Another potential advance lies in improving the specificity of known cancer
biomarkers by defining glycoprotein glycoforms uniquely expressed by cancer
cells (e.g., prostate-specific antigen).

Specific therapies that target glycans are being developed. Most advanced is
immunotherapy against certain tumor-associated gangliosides like GD2 in
melanoma and against incompletely glycosylated mucins. With regard to the
increased β1-6 branching of N-glycans, clinical trials of the N-glycan
synthesis inhibitor swainsonine unfortunately revealed toxicity. The potent
effects of heparin in attenuating tumor metastasis are most likely not due to
its anticoagulant properties but rather to its ability to block P- and
L-selectin binding to tumor and/or host ligands ([Chapter
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). The recent move to supplant traditional
unfractionated heparins with very low-molecular-weight heparins and
heparinoids may be associated with a loss of selectin-inhibitory properties. A
comparative clinical trial is needed. Several compounds have been shown to
antagonize the protumorigenic activities of HS. For example, low-molecular-
weight heparins may inhibit tumor progression not only by blocking selectins,
but also by blocking heparanase activity or by interfering with constitutive
HS activities. Other inhibitors of heparanase, such as suramin, laminarin
sulfate, and the sulfated phosphomannopentaose PI-88, also inhibit
angiogenesis and metastasis, but some of these compounds may also work by
blocking selectins. Some of these compounds may act by competitively
inhibiting HS binding and function. Low-molecular-weight oligosaccharides of
hyaluronan could also be useful therapeutically, because they inhibit the pro-
oncogenic influences of constitutive polymeric hyaluronan, especially drug
resistance and signaling events induced by hyaluronan–CD44 interaction.
Disaccharides that can enter the cell and act as decoys to divert
glycosylation pathways are also showing promise ([Chapter
55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)).

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Morten Thaysen-
Andersen and Jeremy O'Sullivan.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.048

Antibodies, lectins, microbial adhesins, viral agglutinins, and other proteins
with carbohydrate-binding modules, collectively termed glycan-recognizing
probes (GRPs), are widely used in glycan analysis because their specificities
enable them to discriminate among a diverse variety of glycan structures. The
native multivalency of many of these molecules promotes high-affinity avidity
binding to the glycans and cell surfaces containing those glycans. This
chapter describes the variety of commonly used GRPs, the types of analyses to
which they may be applied, and cautionary principles that affect their optimal
use.

The first evidence that glycans were antigenic arose from the discovery of the
human blood group [ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) antigens ([Chapter
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). A key tool in these studies were plant lectins
that by the mid-1940s had found widespread use in typing blood, because some
were relatively specific for blood types and they could be easily purified and
are stable ([Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)). The discovery of the blood
groups and the antibodies and lectins binding them indicated that such
proteins could also be generally useful in identifying specific glycan
sequences.

Hundreds of different plant and animal lectins and other proteins with
carbohydrate-binding molecules (CBMs) have now been characterized. Thus,
although monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are often more specific for glycan
determinants and bind with higher affinity, many plant and animal lectins and
CBMs also have useful specificities for determinants beyond monosaccharides,
have cloned sequences, are usually less expensive and commercially available,
and have well-characterized binding specificities. GBPs are also found in many
other organisms ([Chapters
31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)–[36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)), including viruses and
bacteria ([Chapter 37](/books/n/glyco3/ch37/)), and reagents from these
organisms are also being used in the field. The availability of GBPs and mAbs
has helped to catapult the field of glycobiology into the modern era.

Many of the lectins currently used as tools in glycobiology originate from
plants, but some also come from animals (e.g., snails) or mushrooms. Most were
characterized initially by hapten inhibition assays, in which monosaccharides,
their derivatives, or small oligosaccharides block binding to cells or other
glycan-coated targets. Such small-sized molecules that compete with binding of
a lectin or antibody to a larger ligand are termed haptens. Lectins are often
grouped by specificity depending on the monosaccharide(s) that can inhibit
their binding at millimolar concentrations and their distinct preference for
α- or β-anomers of the sugar. However, lectins within a particular specificity
group may also differ in their affinities for different glycans. The binding
affinity (Kd) of lectins for complex glycans is often in the range of 1–10 µm,
but for monosaccharides the affinity may be in the mm range. For complex
glycoconjugates with multiple determinants or multivalency, the binding
avidity of lectins may approach nanomolar values. For example, concanavalin A
(ConA) is an α-mannose/α-glucose-binding lectin that recognizes N-glycans and
is not known to bind common O-glycans on animal cell glycoproteins. However,
it binds oligomannose-type N-glycans with much higher affinity than complex-
type biantennary N-glycans, and it does not recognize more highly branched
complex-type N-glycans ([Figure
48.1](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f1/?report=objectonly)). Other lectins,
such as L-phytohemagglutinin (L-PHA) and E-PHA from _Phaseolus vulgaris_ , as
well as lentil lectin (LCA) from _Lens culinaris_ , also recognize specific
determinants of N-glycans. Some animal lectins that are widely used include
those from invertebrates, such as _Helix pomatia_ agglutinin (HPA) from the
snail. In fact, these lectins and other lectins are used most frequently to
explore structural features of glycans on glycoproteins, glycolipids, and
cells ([Figures
48.2](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f2/?report=objectonly)–[48.4](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f4/?report=objectonly))
(see also [Chapters 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/) and
[32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/)).

A large number of mAbs have been generated against specific glycan
determinants. Several approaches to obtain these antibodies have been
described.

  1. Whole cells, historically tumor cells, have been used to immunize mice to generate specific mAbs to various glycoprotein and glycolipid antigens, including the Tn antigen (GalNAcα1-Ser/Thr) and the stage-specific embryonic antigen-1 (SSEA-1), now known as the Lewis x (Lex) antigen ([Figure 48.5](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f5/?report=objectonly)). In this approach, hybridomas are screened for mAbs that recognize the immunizing cell but not other types of cells.

  2. [Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/)-protein conjugates (glycans coupled to carrier proteins such as bovine serum albumin [BSA] or keyhole limpet hemocyanin [KLH]) have been used to generate mAbs to specific structures. (BSA is not glycosylated, but the unusual glycans on KLH may serve as adjuvants to enhance immune responses.) Coupling of polysaccharides to protein carriers typically leads the generation of antibodies recognizing internal structural features, whereas coupling of small glycans typically yields antibodies that bind to terminal structural features. A common variation of this approach is to immunize mice directly with total cells, or a preparation of glycoproteins (such as a membrane fraction) or even a purified glycoprotein, glycolipid, or glycosaminoglycan. For example, antibodies to the plant glycoprotein horseradish peroxidase are used to detect the presence of the unusual modifications nonhuman Xylβ1-2Man-R and Fucα1-3GlcNAc-R in the core regions of complex-type N-glycans. Immunization with glycan conjugates has also been used to generate polyclonal antisera in rabbits and chickens. Antibodies to specific glycan determinants can be purified from such antisera by affinity chromatography on immobilized glycans. Knockout mice lacking specific glycoconjugates are also useful for generating antibodies to common self-antigenic structures. For example, antibodies to the common glycolipid sulfatide (3- _O_ -sulfate-Galβ1-ceramide) were obtained from mice that lacked the cerebroside sulfotransferase after immunization with sulfatide. If desired, recombinant single-chain antibodies to glycan determinants can be produced after cloning the VH and VL domains of antibodies from specific hybridomas.

  3. A novel approach to obtain mAbs to specific glycan antigens has been to use mice infected with specific parasites or bacteria followed by preparing hybridomas from splenocytes of the infected animals. This approach has been used to generate a variety of mAbs to pathogen-specific glycan antigens.

Screening for antibodies to the desired antigen usually involves enzyme-linked
immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA)-type assays with immobilized target glycans,
which may vary from small glycans to large polysaccharides. In addition, there
is an emerging technology using phage display to identify single-chain
variable fragments (scFvs) of antibodies that can also bind to glycan
antigens. However, in many cases, it is difficult to define the specific
epitopes recognized by these antibodies because isolated glycans are often
characterized by microheterogeneities and related glycan antigens for
comparison are often unavailable. Recently developed approaches, such as
glycan microarrays and related techniques, especially when combined with
advances in the chemical synthesis of glycans, help to better define the
specificities of mAbs ([Chapter 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)).

Anti-glycan antibodies are widely used in glycobiology, and some common
mammalian antigens they recognize are shown in [Figures
48.5](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f5/?report=objectonly) and
[48.6](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f6/?report=objectonly). Most of the murine
mAbs to glycan antigens are of the IgM isotype. However, if the animal is
well-immunized and serum titers are high, IgGs are frequently generated (∼35%
of the plant-glycan-directed mAbs are IgG). The higher valency of IgM
antibodies that form pentamers or hexamers can affect the binding specificity.
Some antibodies to glycan antigens are commercially available, whereas others
are obtainable only from individual laboratories or stock centers. Some
antibodies against mammalian antigens are shown in [Figures
48.5](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f5/?report=objectonly) and
[48.6](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f6/?report=objectonly), and they recognize
terminal glycan determinants, although subterminal sequences may also be
required for binding and or in some cases may decrease binding. Many of the
antibodies generated to date against plant glycans recognize internal
structural features of these polysaccharides. In addition, the context of
expression (free glycan vs. glycoprotein vs. glycolipid) or the class of
glycan (N- vs. O-linked) may play a significant role in determining
specificity and affinity. For example, antibodies to the 6-sulfo-SLex antigen
require the fucose, sialic acid, and GlcNAc-6- _O_ -sulfate residues. In
contrast, the MECA-79 antibody recognizes extended core-1 O-glycans that
contain internal GlcNAc-6- _O_ -sulfate residues; it does not require either
the fucose or sialic acid for recognition, but it does require the core-1
O-glycan. Several antibodies against the plant cell wall homogalacturonans or
xylans bind to internal backbone residues. There are also many mAbs that
recognize different glycolipids and glycosaminoglycans.

Some of the important uses of lectins, CBMs, and antibodies are illustrated in
[Figure 48.7](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f7/?report=objectonly). Antibodies,
lectins, and CBMs each have distinct advantages. Lectins are usually less
expensive than antibodies. The genes encoding many CBMs have been cloned,
enabling facile heterologous expression to obtain needed quantities of the
protein. However, antibodies, lectins, and CBMs independently may be needed to
bind specifically to certain determinants. For example, no lectin specific for
the SLea antigen has been identified. Conversely, no mAbs have been identified
that bind general determinants, such as α2-6-linked sialic acid and
α2-3-linked sialic acid, whereas lectins have this specificity (e.g.,
_Sambucus nigra_ agglutinin [SNA] and _Maackia amurensis_ lectin [MAL],
respectively). However, mAbs that are specific to some restricted
determinants, such as Lex and SLea antigens, often cannot distinguish their
presentation on O-glycans, N-glycans, or glycolipids. In addition, although
available antibodies thus far cannot distinguish N-glycan structural motifs,
such features are well recognized by some plant lectins. For example, the
plant lectin ConA does not bind mucin-type O-glycans in animal cells, but
binds only to some specific classes of N-glycans ([Figure
48.1](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f1/?report=objectonly)). Additionally,
E-PHA binds “bisected” complex-type N-glycans ([Figure
48.2](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f2/?report=objectonly)) and does not bind
any known glycolipid or O-glycan. Great care should be taken to use lectins
and antibodies at appropriate concentrations in which their specificity can be
exploited. At high lectin concentrations, glycans with very low affinity
binding may interact and confound interpretations. But in some cases this is
advantageous, as when using concentrated lectins to a wide range of
glycosylated proteins or glycopeptides differing in structures. Thus,
antibodies, CBMs, and lectins each offer distinct advantages in defining
glycan structures.

The glycan determinants bound with highest affinity by each of these probes
have been identified by a combination of approaches, including affinity
chromatography, glycan synthesis, and binding to specific glycoconjugates and
cells. A good example of this is the phytohemagglutinin L-PHA, which is often
used by immunologists as a mitogen to stimulate quiescent T cells to divide.
L-PHA originates from the red kidney bean _P. vulgaris_ , which also contains
isolectins to L-PHA, notably E-PHA. L-PHA binds to certain branched, complex-
type N-glycans containing the pentasaccharide sequence
Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2(Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-6)Manα1-R (the so-called “2-6-branch”), as
shown in the boxed portion of the glycan in [Figure
48.2](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f2/?report=objectonly). Curiously, the only
monosaccharide that effectively inhibits either L-PHA or E-PHA is GalNAc,
although this monosaccharide is not part of the N-glycan determinants
recognized by these lectins ([Figure
48.2](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f2/?report=objectonly)). The binding of
L-PHA is used to identify specific types of branched N-glycans in cells. L-PHA
binding is dramatically decreased in mice genetically null for the branching
β1-6 _N_ -acetylglucosaminyltransferase (MGAT5 and -5B.) ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). The expression of L- or E-PHA-binding glycoproteins
is increased in many tumor cells (see [Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)).
Similar studies show E-PHA binds bisected complex-type N-glycans containing
the GlcNAcβ1-4Man-R in the core, and such structures are produced by MGAT3,
and E-PHA-binding glycans are also elevated in some tumor cells.

Thus, using a variety of lectins and antibodies, it is possible to deduce many
aspects of glycan structures. Microarrays in which a variety of lectins and
antibodies are printed on a slide can also give valuable information about the
glycosylation status of cells and glycoconjugates. This approach is especially
sensitive in regard to defining whether biological samples differ in
glycosylation. For example, such approaches have been adapted to study
differential glycosylation of prion glycoproteins using a panel of
biotinylated lectins in ELISA-type formats.

There are several approaches to using antibodies and lectins in glycan
purification, including affinity chromatography or affinity binding and
immunoprecipitation or lectin-induced precipitation. The proteins may be
covalently coupled to a carrier such as Sepharose or biotinylated and captured
on streptavidin-Sepharose. In addition, antibodies may be noncovalently
captured on protein A (or G)-Sepharose. These bound antibodies and lectins can
then be used to isolate glycoconjugates expressing specific glycan
determinants. ConA-Sepharose is commonly used to isolate glycoproteins as it
shows little binding to nonglycosylated proteins. However, it does not bind
all glycoproteins because it recognizes specific N-glycan structures. ConA-
Sepharose has also been used to isolate free oligo- and polymannose-, hybrid-,
and complex-type biantennary N-glycans.

When combined in a serial format, multiple lectins can be used in affinity
chromatography to isolate most of the major glycan structures present in
animal cells, with glycans being separated as classes that share common
determinants. An example of serial lectin affinity chromatography is shown in
[Figure 48.8](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f8/?report=objectonly). Coupling
with ion-exchange chromatography and high-performance liquid chromatography
([HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/))
can yield highly pure glycans with predicted structures that can then be
confirmed by mass spectrometry of native and permethylated derivatives
([Chapters 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/) and [51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)).

Mixed-bed lectin chromatography using a combination of different immobilized
lectins is useful for simultaneously separating all types of glycoconjugates
from nonglycosylated material (e.g., glycopeptides from peptides).
Combinations of affinity chromatography and other chromatographic techniques
can be very useful in identifying and separating glycopeptides. Thus, the
ability of glycans to be recognized by lectins dependent on specific
structural features in the glycans is a powerful tool for glycan
identification and isolation. In some approaches, the glycans are tagged at
the reducing end by fluorophores and radioisotopes or may be obtained by
metabolic radiolabeling from cells or tissues grown in the presence of
radiolabeled sugar precursors, such as [2-3H]mannose or [6-3H]glucosamine.
[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) fractionation shown on
immobilized lectins in [Figure
48.8](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f8/?report=objectonly) is currently not
possible with antibodies because no antibodies are known that can distinguish
such core structural features in glycans.

When intact glycoproteins or complex polysaccharides (e.g., those found in
plant cell walls [[Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)]) are analyzed for their
interactions with plant lectins or antibodies, the interpretation of data may
be complicated by the multivalency of the glycoprotein/polysaccharide and the
density of the immobilized lectin/antibody. For example, glycoproteins
containing multiple high-mannose-type N-glycans bind so tightly to immobilized
ConA that it is difficult to elute the bound glycoprotein, even with extremely
high concentrations of hapten and under harsh conditions. Lower densities of
ConA conjugation reduce its avidity for the glycoproteins and promote hapten
dissociation of bound ligands with lower concentrations of sugars. When used
in combination, multiple lectins, such as ConA, AAL ( _Aleuria aurantia_
lectin), LCA, and RCA ( _Ricinus communis_ agglutinin), can be used to isolate
most glycoproteins containing N-and O-glycans from animal cells. This is a
potentially powerful approach for glycoproteomics, or the identification of
glycoproteins and their glycosylation status.

Lectins and antibodies can also be used in western blotting approaches to
characterize protein and lipid glycosylation, in which biotinylated lectin or
antibody probes are applied to material transferred to nitrocellulose or other
supports after electrophoresis or chromatography. The bound lectins/antibodies
are visualized by binding streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase and conversion of
luminescent substrates. In these approaches, the concentrations of lectins and
antibodies used must be low enough both to reduce false-positive, nonspecific
binding and to allow for inhibition by appropriate haptens to confirm sugar
binding. Removal of N-glycans by PNGaseF, or of sialic acid by neuraminidase,
can eliminate binding to specific lectins and antibodies in western blotting,
thus indicating the lectin/antibody-bound determinant.

The major approaches for using antibodies, CBMs, and lectins to characterize
cell-surface glycoconjugates are histochemistry (lectins) and
immunohistochemistry (antibodies), flow cytometry with cell sorting, and cell
agglutination. In histochemistry and immunohistochemistry, tissues are
prepared and fixed as usual for histological staining, and then incubated with
appropriate biotinylated or peroxidase-labeled lectins or antibodies
(glycolipids are extracted during standard paraffin embedding procedures and
require frozen sections for sensitive detection). The bound lectins, CBMs, or
antibodies are then visualized by means of secondary reagents, such as
streptavidin-peroxidase or labeled secondary antibody. These approaches often
yield information that is difficult to obtain by any other approach. For
example, they can reveal the spatial orientation of different glycans, their
relative abundance, and whether they are intracellular and/or extracellular.
Three important controls in such studies are (1) use of lectins, CBMs, or
antibodies at limiting concentrations to avoid nonspecific binding; (2)
confirmation of the specificity of binding by appropriate inhibition by
haptens or by destruction of the predicted target glycans with glycosidases;
and (3) use of multiple lectins, CBMs, or antibodies to provide further
confirmation of the conclusions.

Lectins and antibodies to glycans have also been widely used in flow cytometry
and cell sorting. In such studies, cells are incubated with low,
nonagglutinating levels of lectins or antibodies that are biotinylated and
conjugated to fluorescently labeled streptavidin or directly fluorescently
labeled. Cells with bound lectins or antibodies can then be identified by
their fluorescence in the flow cytometer, and the degree of fluorescence can
be correlated with the number of binding sites. A key consideration in flow
cytometry is to avoid high concentrations of lectins or antibodies that cause
agglutination of cells, which must be ruled out by direct microscopic
visualization. Lectins and antibodies can also be used to identify specific
membrane localization of different glycans, using confocal microscopy and
electron microscopy.

Lectins and antibodies are useful for characterizing cell-surface glycans when
limited numbers of cells are available. Studies on glycosylation of embryonic
stem cells have been greatly aided by using panels of specific lectins to
identify unique glycan determinants and changes in their expression during
cellular differentiation. A recent variation of this approach is to use a
microarray of immobilized lectins, which are probed with fluorescently labeled
glycoproteins in extracts of cells. Such assays can reveal minor differences
in protein glycosylation between different samples and give insight into the
glycan structures that are present.

One of the oldest uses of lectins is in the agglutination and precipitation of
glycoconjugates, cells, and membrane vesicle preparations. The easiest assay
for many soluble lectins that are multivalent is agglutination of target
cells, such as erythrocytes, leukocytes, or even bacteria or fungi.
[Agglutination](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/agglutination/) can often be
easily observed without a microscope, but it is also measurable in instruments
such as aggregometers. In these assays, a lectin solution is serially diluted
and the reciprocal of the final dilution that gives measurable cell
agglutination is taken to define the activity. Bacterial agglutination by
plant and animal lectins is often used to explore the surface glycocalyx and
changes in glycocalyx upon culture conditions and to define phenotypes of
different strains or serotypes. [Lectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/lectin/)
precipitation and aggregation can be used to define the glycan composition and
overall architecture of polysaccharides, as has been done for bacterial,
algal, plant, and animal polysaccharides.

An important use of lectins and antibodies has been in the selection of cell
lines (e.g., Chinese hamster ovary [CHO] cells) that express altered cell-
surface glycans. The common lectins that have been used are ConA, WGA (wheat
germ agglutinin), L-PHA, LCA, PSA ( _Pisum sativum_ agglutinin), E-PHA, ricin,
modeccin, and abrin. The latter three lectins are heterodimeric, disulfide-
bonded proteins that are classified as type-II ribosome-inactivating proteins;
they contain an A subunit that constitutes an enzyme called RNA-N-glycosidase,
which inactivates the 28S ribosome, and a B subunit that is a galactose-
binding lectin ([Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)). Other plant lectins such
as ConA, WGA, or LCA (which lack an enzymatic or toxic A subunit) are still
toxic to animal cells via poorly understood mechanisms, whereas yet others,
such as soybean agglutinin (SBA) and peanut agglutinin (PNA), are not highly
toxic to animal cells in culture. One mechanism of toxicity of plant lectins
is the induction of apoptosis, perhaps by blocking receptor or nutrient
transport functions in cells, or by cross-linking apoptotic receptors.
Noncytotoxic lectins and antibodies to specific glycans can be rendered toxic
by conjugation to ricin A subunit or other toxic proteins. Using such agents,
both loss-of-function (e.g., loss of a glycosyl-transferase or glycosidase)
and gain-of-function (e.g., activation of a latent transferase gene) mutants
have been obtained. More details about glycosylation mutants of cultured cells
are presented in [Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/).

The specificity of lectins and antibodies to particular glycans has made them
especially useful in cloning genes encoding glycosyltransferases or other
proteins required for proper glycosylation, such as nucleotide sugar
transporters. For example, CHO cells and the African green monkey kidney cell
line COS lack glycans with terminal α-galactose residues. Consequently, the
cells do not bind the plant lectin GSI-B4 ([Figure
48.3](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f3/?report=objectonly)). When transfected
with a cDNA library prepared from cells that do express terminal α-galactose
residues (such as murine teratocarcinoma cells F9), cells that have taken up a
plasmid encoding the cognate α1-3 galactosyltransferase and express terminal
α-residues will bind to GSI-B4 and can be identified with plates coated with
the lectin. Isolation of plasmids from the bound cells and repeated recloning
and reexpression by this technique (called expression cloning) led to the
identification of a specific gene encoding the murine α1-3
galactosyltransferase (Ggta1). Similar approaches using an antibody to the
Lewis x antigen (SSEA-1) led to cloning of the Lewis blood group FuT-III.

Related approaches using antibodies and lectins to other glycan structures and
wild-type CHO cells and CHO mutants led to the identification of the genes
encoding many other glycosyltransferases, including some involved in extending
glycosphingolipids and nucleotide sugar transporters, such as the transporter
for CMP-NeuAc. Such approaches based on lectin selection are also useful with
yeast. For example, the gene encoding a yeast _N_ -acetyl-
glucosaminyltransferase (GlcNAcT) was identified by expression cloning using a
GlcNAcT-deficient yeast. The mannan chains of the yeast _Kluyveromyces lactis_
normally contain some terminal _N_ -acetylglucosamine residues that are bound
by the plant lectin GSL-II, which binds terminal _N_ -acetylglucosamine
residues ([Figure 48.4](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f4/?report=objectonly)).
A mutant lacking the GlcNAcT and lacking terminal _N_ -acetylglucosamine
residues on mannoproteins was identified. Transformation of yeast with DNA
containing the gene encoding the GlcNAcT led to yeast clones that were bound
by the fluorescently labeled GSL-II. This strategy was used to identify the
gene encoding the GlcNAcT. The transporters for UDP-Gal in _Leishmania_
parasites and in the plant _Arabidopsis_ were also identified by expression
cloning in Lec8 CHO cells; these cells have a mutation in their endogenous
UDP-Gal transporter, and consequently lack galactose-containing glycans on
their surface. For the UDP-Gal transporter from _Arabidopsis_ , Lec8 cells
were cotransfected with a cDNA library encoding the putative _Arabidopsis_
UDP-Gal transporter, along with a glucuronosyltransferase that can lead to
synthesis of the unsulfated version of the HNK epitope ([Figure
48.6](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f6/?report=objectonly)), GlcAβ1-3Galβ-R
that is bound by a specific antibody. This identification strategy led to the
expression cloning of several UDP-Gal transporters from _Arabidopsis_.

CHO and COS cell lines have also been useful in characterizing the activities
of novel glycosyltransferase genes that were identified by other approaches.
For example, candidate fucosyltransferase genes encoding α1-2 or α1-3
fucosyltransferases have been expressed in CHO and COS cells, which lack these
enzymes. Expression of these enzymes then leads to surface expression of
antigens recognized by specific antibodies and lectins, such as the H-antigen
(for the α1-2 FucT) or Lex and SLex (for the α1-3 FucT).

Lectins and antibodies to glycan antigens have been useful in assaying
specific glycosyltransferases and glycosidases in various formats ([Figure
48.7](/books/NBK453096/figure/ch48.f7/?report=objectonly)). Immobilized
lectins have been used to isolate products of glycosyltransferase assays, such
as chitin polysaccharides on WGA or glycosylated peptides on mixed-bed lectin
columns. α1-3 fucosyltransferases that synthesize the Lex and SLex antigens
have been assayed based on capture of the product on immobilized antibodies to
these antigens or binding of antibody to the immobilized fucosylated product
in an ELISA-type format, or in flow cytometry using beads containing the
acceptor glycan that is modified by an enzyme to a new structure recognized by
an antibody or lectin. Likewise, α2-3 sialyltransferases and α2-6
sialyltransferases have been assayed using immobilized acceptors in an ELISA-
type format and in BIAcore formats ([Chapter 29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/)), and
their products have been measured with MAL (which binds to the α2-3-sialylated
product) or SNA (which binds to the α2-6-sialylated product). Similarly, α1-3
galactosyltransferases have been assayed using immobilized acceptors in an
ELISA-type format, and the product has been measured with GSI-B4 or _Viscum
album_ agglutinin, which binds to the α1-3 galactosylated product. The
glycoprotein-specific β1-4 _N_ -acetylgalactosaminyltransferase has been
assayed using glycoprotein acceptors in solution, capture by a specific
monoclonal antibody in a microtiter plate, and measurement of product by an
ELISA-type assay with a _Wisteria floribunda_ agglutinin (WFA) that binds to
terminal β1-4-linked GalNAc residues generated by the enzyme. Conversely,
glycosidases can be assayed by measuring the gain in binding of lectins or
antibodies. For example, the lectin PNA, which binds to nonsialylated
Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-Ser/Thr in O-glycans, can be used to measure bacterial
sialidases by agglutination of treated erythrocytes. Many microbial hydrolases
have evolved to attack their substrates in structurally complex contexts
(e.g., plant cell walls [[Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)]). The number and
diversity of glycan-directed probes now allows the detailed characterization
of such enzymes acting on biologically relavent structures, yielding new
insights into their activities. It is easy to envision other ways in which
lectins, CBMs, and antibodies can be used to probe the products of specific
glycosidases and glycosyltransferases, given the specificities of the glycan-
directed probes described here.

The authors acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Felix Broecker.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.049

Rapid progress in understanding glycosylation pathways of eukaryotes came with
the application of genetic strategies to isolate mutants of mammalian cells
and yeast with defects in glycan synthesis. This chapter reviews methods used
to isolate mammalian cell glycosylation mutants and the diversity of mutants
that may be obtained from selections and screens. The applications of
glycosylation mutants to address functional roles of glycans and in
glycosylation engineering are discussed briefly. Many of the cell lines
described in this chapter are available through the American Type Culture
Collection.

The success of bacterial and yeast genetics in isolating mutants and using
them to define biochemical pathways led in the late 1960s to the development
of somatic cell genetics using mammalian cells. Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells were selected by two independent groups for initial experiments to
isolate stable mutants. Somatic cell genetic strategies were applied early to
glycobiology, yielding numerous mutants in glycoprotein biosynthesis and later
in proteoglycan, glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, and glycolipid
biosynthesis. The ability to isolate glycosylation mutants in mammalian cells
made it possible to unravel pathways of glycan synthesis and degradation, and
to identify, isolate, and map structural and regulatory genes. CHO cells thus
became a focus for experiments to decipher glycosylation pathways, and
importantly, provided mutant host cells for the production of viruses and
glycoproteins with modified glycans. This proved to be extremely beneficial to
the biotechnology industry because most recombinant therapeutics are
glycoproteins. CHO cells and CHO glycosylation mutants are now the workhorse
of the biotechnology industry. They are particularly useful because they
produce only minor, if any, quantities of nonhuman glycans or glycan
modifications that give rise to undesirable antibodies. Conserved
glycosylation pathways in yeast were delineated by similar approaches
([Chapter 23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)).

Mutants in any cell type often accumulate the precursor immediately upstream
of the block in a pathway and thereby reveal the structure of their
substrate(s). Sequencing of mutant alleles reveals specific mutations that may
give rise to a glycosylation phenotype. In most cases, mutations are loss-of-
function and they reduce or abrogate the activity of an enzyme in a pathway;
but there are also gain-of-function mutations that activate a silent
glycosylation gene, elevate the expression of an existing activity, or
inactivate a negative regulatory factor ([Figure
49.1](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f1/?report=objectonly)). In nearly all
cases, glycosylation mutations lead to the presence of altered glycans on
cell-surface glycoconjugates and changes in cell properties that link glycan
structure to function. Although gene editing techniques using CRISPR/Cas9 or
transcription activator–like effectors (TALENs) are now the method of choice
for introducing a mutation that weakens or ablates a glycosylation gene
([Chapters 27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/) and [56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)), such
approaches do not allow for the serendipitous findings that often emerge from
genetic screens. For example, a screen of HAP1 (haploid) human cells
mutagenized by retroviral gene trap, led to the identification of multiple,
previously unknown glycosylation genes required for the synthesis of the
glycan ligand on α-dystroglycan that binds laminin ([Figure
49.2](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f2/?report=objectonly)).

Cells in culture mutate at a low rate (<10−6 mutations per locus per
generation). In CHO cells, many loci are functionally haploid (single copy),
and in HAP1 human cells, essentially all loci are haploid, which means that a
single hit may generate a recessive mutant. However, typical mammalian cells
are diploid and immortalized cells are often hyperploid, so the frequency of
finding recessive mutants is low. To greatly increase the probability of
finding desirable mutants, mutations may be induced by treating cells with
chemical (e.g., alkylating agents), physical (e.g., ionizing radiation), or
biological (e.g., a virus) mutagens. Nevertheless, selection or enrichment is
usually needed to find rare recessive or dominant mutants bearing a desired
glycosylation phenotype ([Figure
49.1](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f1/?report=objectonly)). For example,
direct selection for resistance to cytotoxic plant lectins ([Chapters
31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/) and [32](/books/n/glyco3/ch32/)) that bind to cell-
surface glycans gives a range of glycosylation mutants. Importantly, many
mutants resistant to one or more lectins because of the loss of specific
sugars, become supersensitive to a different group of lectins that recognize
sugar residues exposed by the mutation ([Figure
49.2](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f2/?report=objectonly)). The latter may be
used to select for revertants in the original mutant population. Nontoxic
lectins are also useful for enriching lectin-binding mutants (e.g., by flow
cytometry). Mutations that affect all stages of glycosylation reactions,
including the generation and transport of nucleotide sugars, have been
identified using lectins as selective agents.

In principle, any glycan-binding protein (GBP) or agent that recognizes cell-
surface glycans or a glycoprotein can be used to isolate mutants with a
glycosylation defect ([Figure
49.2](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f2/?report=objectonly)). Conjugation of a
GBP or protein domain to a toxin that cannot enter the cell independently, but
can kill the cell following entry, can be used to select mutants when
cytotoxic lectins are not available. For example, basic fibroblast growth
factor (FGF-2)–saporin complexes have been used for the selection of mutants
deficient in heparan sulfate (HS). Lectins, antibodies, or ligands that are
fluorescently tagged may be used to enrich for mutants that are either
deficient in binding or have acquired a novel binding ability because of
altered glycosylation or reduced expression of an antigen at the cell surface.
Panning or immunodepletion are related techniques. For example, coating a
plate with FGF-2 allows selection of mutant cells that fail to produce HS
proteoglycans, and consequently fail to adhere to a FGF-2-coated plate. HAP1
cells that fail to glycosylate α-dystroglycan fail to bind a specific
monoclonal antibody and may be enriched by immunodepletion ([Figure
49.2](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f2/?report=objectonly)). Radiation suicide
is another direct selection method for obtaining glycosylation mutants.
Incubation of cells with a radioactive sugar, sulfate, or other precursor of
high radiospecific activity leads to labeled glycoproteins, glycolipids, or
proteoglycans. After prolonged storage of the cells, radiation damage will
kill wild-type cells, whereas mutants with reduced incorporation of the label
survive. Animal cells can also be replica-plated, much like microbial
colonies, using porous cloth made of polyester or nylon as the replica
([Figure 49.2](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f2/?report=objectonly)). Colonies
of cells on the disc can be used to identify mutants with reduced
incorporation of radioactive precursors, or to identify mutants that fail to
bind to a lectin, an antibody, or a growth factor. An adaptation of this
technique allows detection of mutants affecting a specific enzyme by direct
assay for activity in colony lysates generated on a disc. Although this
technique has great specificity, its limited capacity makes detection of rare
mutants difficult, and mutagenesis before screening is usually a requirement.

Regardless of the technique used to isolate mutants, the resulting strains
must be cloned and carefully characterized for stability and the biochemical
and molecular basis of mutation. Additional genetic analyses include somatic
cell hybridization for dominance/recessive testing and assigning mutants to
different genetic complementation groups. Biochemical analysis involves the
characterization of glycan structures produced by mutant cells ([Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)), the quantitation and analysis of intermediates,
and assays for activities thought to be missing or acquired based on the
properties of the mutant. Identifying the molecular basis of mutation requires
isolation of a complementing cDNA that reverts the mutant phenotype and
determining whether the mutation arose from defective transcription,
translation, or stability of the gene product, or from a missense or nonsense
mutation in the coding region of the gene. Targeted gene mutation ([Chapter
56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)) can also be used to validate a phenotype after a
gene has been identified in a selected mutant.

Transgenic mice that overexpress a glycosylation gene, or mutant mice that
lack a glycosylation activity because of targeted gene inactivation ([Chapter
56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)), are a source of mutant cells that may be used for
glycobiology research. Fibroblasts or lymphoblasts can be obtained readily
from humans with a disorder of glycosylation. Cells may be grown as primary
cultures or immortalized by viral transformation. By crossing mutant mice with
the Immortomouse, which carries a temperature-sensitive SV40 T antigen in
every cell, immortalized mutant cell lines can be derived from essentially any
cell type. For mutations that cause embryos to die during gestation, mutant
embryonic stem (ES) cells can be derived from blastocysts, provided the
mutation does not result in cell-autonomous lethality. The resulting mutant ES
cell lines can be used to investigate functions for specific glycans during
differentiation in embryoid cell culture, or in vivo in mouse chimeras. A
chimera is obtained by injecting wild-type or mutant ES cells into the inner
cell mass of a mouse blastocyst. If the ES cells survive, the resulting mouse
is a mosaic of cells derived from the ES cells and cells derived from the
blastocyst. Mutant ES cells may not contribute equally well to all tissues.
For example, ES cells lacking MGAT1 are unable to make complex or hybrid
N-glycans ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)), but they differentiate normally
into many cell types in cultured embryoid bodies. However, following
introduction into blastocysts, ES cells lacking MGAT1 do not contribute to the
organized layer of bronchial epithelium in chimeric embryos.

Immortalized fibroblasts from patients with defects in glycosylation can be
used to study the underlying defect ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).
Immortalized human cell lines bearing defects in lysosomal degradation are
also available. Induced pluripotent stem cells derived from fibroblasts from
patients with glycosylation disorders provide another approach for obtaining
various differentiated cell lines for further study.

Selection schemes based on isolating rare mutants resistant to cytotoxic plant
lectins have yielded a large number of glycosylation mutants affected in
diverse aspects of glycan synthesis ([Table
49.1](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB1/?report=objectonly)). Some mutations
affect several types of glycans, such as mutants with reduced nucleotide sugar
formation or transport into the Golgi. For example, the UDP-Gal transporter
defect in Lec8 mutant cells affects transfer of galactose to O- and N-glycans
on glycoproteins, as well as to glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and glycolipids. The
ldlD mutant is particularly interesting in this regard, because it lacks the
epimerase responsible for converting UDP-Glc to UDP-Gal and UDP-GlcNAc to UDP-
GalNAc ([Figure 49.3](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f3/?report=objectonly)).
Because there are salvage pathways for importing Gal and GalNAc into cells
([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)), the composition of different classes of
glycans can be controlled in ldlD cells by nutritional supplementation with
either of these two sugars. Mutations in glycosyltransferase genes may ablate
activity or affect the kinetic properties of an enzyme (e.g., Lec1A, [Table
49.1](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB1/?report=objectonly)), or its subcellular
localization (e.g., Lec4A, [Table
49.1](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB1/?report=objectonly)). Sequencing mutant
alleles provides leads for further site-directed mutagenesis of the gene in
order to define important functional domains of the protein required for
catalysis or compartmentalization.

Some lectin-resistant mutants are defective in the formation of dolichol-P-
oligosaccharides or in the processing reactions that remove Glc or Man after
transfer of the glycan chain to a glycoprotein ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). The latter mutants revealed the identity and
importance of α-mannosidases in the formation of N-glycans. However, when the
α-mannosidase II gene _Man2a1_ was ablated in mice, no effect was seen in
certain tissues because another previously unknown α-mannosidase gene (
_Man2a2_ ) allowed N-glycans to be synthesized. This finding emphasizes a
limitation of somatic cells in that they may not express glycosylation genes
that are developmentally regulated in a tissue-specific manner, thereby
precluding the isolation of mutants affected in those genes from that cell
line.

The recessive mutants in [Table
49.1](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB1/?report=objectonly) lack a glycosylation
activity or fail to make a precursor. Dominant mutations that activate a
silent gene reveal activities that may normally be expressed only in a few,
very specialized cells in the body. Therefore, dominant mutants are important
in glycosylation gene discovery, for identifying mechanisms of glycosylation
gene regulation, and for defining pathways of glycan biosynthesis. The mutants
in [Table 49.2](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB2/?report=objectonly) show a
gain-of-function, dominant, lectin-resistant phenotype caused by the increased
expression of a glycosyltransferase that is normally silent or expressed at
very low levels. The activation of a glycosyltransferase gene may reflect a
mutation in a regulatory region of the gene or in a _trans_ -acting factor.
The genetic bases of the mutants in [Table
49.2](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB2/?report=objectonly) are not known, but
their characterization may reveal novel genes or regulatory factors that may
not have been previously known to exist.

[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) defects in GPI-
anchor biosynthesis reduce expression of GPI-anchored proteins at the cell
surface ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). Originally, many GPI-anchor
mutants were isolated by strategies that took advantage of antibodies to a
GPI-anchored glycoprotein. For example, lymphoma cells expressing Thy-1 on
their surface were incubated with an antibody to Thy-1 and serum-containing
complement, which lysed cells expressing the Thy-1 antigen. Loss of GPI-anchor
biosynthesis reduced the expression of Thy-1 on the surface and conferred
resistance to the cytolytic effect. Other mutants have been obtained by
sorting cells that do not bind to a fluorescent antibody or with bacterial
toxins that bind GPI glycans. The GPI-anchor mutants obtained to date fall
into many genetic complementation groups, each having a different lesion in
GPI-anchor biosynthesis ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). These mutants
reveal the complexity of GPI-anchor biosynthesis: multiple gene products are
involved in forming the _N_ -acetylglucosamine linkage to
phosphatidylinositol, the first committed intermediate in the pathway;
dolichol-P-Man is used as the donor of Man; at least three enzymes are
involved in the attachment of ethanolamine phosphate residues; and five genes
are required for the transfer of the GPI anchor to protein. The available
strains show the importance of genetic approaches for identifying genes that
might not be obvious from measuring biosynthetic reactions in vitro.

A large collection of mutants defective in GAG/proteoglycan biosynthesis has
been isolated ([Table
49.3](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB3/?report=objectonly)). Many of these
mutants were obtained by replica plating methods using sulfate incorporation
to monitor GAG production in colonies ([Figure
49.2](/books/NBK453088/figure/ch49.f2/?report=objectonly)). Mutants in the
early steps of GAG biosynthesis (complementation groups A, B, and G) lack both
CS and HS chains, and enzymatic assays showed that they lack enzymes
responsible for the assembly of the core protein linkage tetrasaccharide
shared by both these types of GAGs ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)).
Another class of mutants (group D) is defective only in HS biosynthesis. This
mutation defines a bifunctional enzyme (EXT1) that catalyzes the alternating
addition of GlcNAc and glucuronic acid (GlcA) residues to growing HS chains.
Some of the mutant alleles depress both enzyme activities, whereas others only
affect the GlcA transfer activity. Thus, the mutants define different
functional domains of the protein, which have been mapped by sequencing
various mutant alleles. Mutants in another bifunctional enzyme, _N_
-acetylglucosamine N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (NDST1), have only a
partial deficiency in N-sulfation of HS chains. Further analysis of the mutant
showed that more than one isozyme is present in CHO cells and that the defect
affects only one locus. Thus, the mutants revealed early on that the assembly
of HS is much more complex than had been appreciated on the basis of known
structures, enzymatic reactions measured in cell extracts, or intermediates
observed in pulse-labeling experiments.

Glycolipids and glycans linked by O-GalNAc are often relatively simple in
cultured cells. For example, CHO cells synthesize mainly gangliosides GM3 and
lactosylceramide with a small amount of glucosylceramide. O-GalNAc glycans
contain up to only four sugars in glycoproteins from CHO cells. O-Fuc, O-Glc,
and O-Man glycans are expressed on only a small subset of glycoproteins and
are generally not detected by glycomic profiling methods ([Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). All of these glycans are affected in the mutants
described in [Table 49.1](/books/NBK453088/table/CH49TB1/?report=objectonly)
in which CMP-Neu5Ac, UDP-Gal, UDP-GalNAc, or GDP-Fuc are reduced in the Golgi.
Similarly, a defective sialyltransferase or galactosyltransferase may cause
these glycans to be truncated. A mutant of B16 melanoma cells that is
defective in ceramide glucosyltransferase (glucosylceramide synthase) lacks
all glycolipids because this enzyme catalyzes the first step in the synthetic
pathway ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). However, cultured cell mutants
defective in polypeptide O-GalNAc transferases (GALNTs) or protein
O-fucosyltransferase (POFUT1) have not been isolated. This may reflect the
paucity of cytotoxic lectins or toxins that bind to O-glycans and glycolipids
or, in some cases, because of redundancy of enzymes ([Chapters
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/) and [11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)). Mice lacking
specific glycolipid biosynthetic enzymes and glycosyltransferases that
transfer GlcNAc or Fuc to protein have been generated and provide a source of
mutant cells that may be studied in culture. Interestingly, cells lacking the
O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) that acts in the cytoplasm to transfer GlcNAc to
protein have not been obtained, and mouse mutants defective in this
transferase become arrested in development at the two-cell-stage embryo,
showing that this O-GlcNAc addition is essential for cell viability.

Fortunately for glycobiologists, the vast majority of glycosylation mutations
still allow single cell viability in vitro under ideal culture conditions.
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) mutants of
mammalian cells have thus been used to address many questions in glycobiology
and for glycosylation engineering of recombinant glycoproteins ([Chapter
56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)). Because mutant selections are broad and often not
intentionally biased, they generate mutants defective in both known and novel
reactions. Thus, glycosylation mutants play an important role in research to
define the pathways and regulation of glycosylation in mammals. In this
regard, they are more useful tools than mutant mice because cells in culture
are viable in the absence of glycolipids, GPI anchors, proteoglycans,
O-GalNAc, O-Fuc, O-Glc, O-Man glycans, and complex or hybrid N-glycans.
Glycosylation mutants make truncated or altered glycans and thus provide an
opportunity to study functional roles for cell-surface glycans in the context
of a living cell. Important insights have been gained into specific sugars
required for viral, bacterial, or parasite adhesion and infection, and for
leukocyte cell adhesion and motility. In addition, functional roles for
glycans in the intracellular sorting and secretion of glycoproteins, in growth
factor binding and activation, and in receptor functions have been identified
using glycosylation mutants. For example, a panel of CHO glycosylation mutants
was used in a coculture assay to show that ligand-induced
[Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) signaling is reduced when GDP-Fuc
levels are low, but is unaffected by reductions in Sia. Similarly, one of the
first demonstrations for coreceptor functions for HS used mutant CHO cells
defective in HS synthesis and engineered to express the FGF receptor.

Although glycosylation is in many cases dispensable for survival of isolated
cells in a culture dish, it is often crucial in vivo. Gene ablation studies in
mice have identified several instances in which an intact glycosylation
pathway is essential for embryogenesis. Examples include mutants that lack
complex and hybrid N-glycans and proteoglycan mutants defective in HS, whereas
the corresponding mutants in CHO cells do not cause an obvious growth
phenotype. Thus, one theme that emerges from the study of mutants is that
glycosylation is critical in the context of a multicellular organism but
dispensable in isolated cells. This conclusion has been driven home in recent
years by the discovery of human genetic diseases, which arise from mutations
in genes involved in glycosylation ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

CHO cells have become the cells of choice for the biotechnology industry in
the production of recombinant therapeutic glycoproteins and in glycosylation
engineering (see [Chapter 56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)). For example, CHO cells
lacking FUT8, which adds fucose to the core GlcNAc of complex N-glycans are
used to produce cytotoxic therapeutic antibodies that have a greatly enhanced
ability to kill their target cells. In another example, CHO cells with
multiple mutations that simplify N- and O-glycans are being used by X-ray
crystallographers to produce homogeneous preparations of membrane
glycoproteins with highly truncated N- and O-glycans, greatly facilitating
their crystallization.

Somatic cell genetics arose from the desire to manipulate the genome of
cultured cells in vitro. Today, the availability of genomic sequences from
multiple organisms has shifted the emphasis in genetics toward the generation
of mutant organisms using the techniques of transgenesis, homologous
recombination for gene replacement, conditional gene inactivation and gene
editing. However, the study of somatic cell mutants still plays an important
role in glycobiology research because it provides a less-expensive and faster
method for studying the effects of deleting or expressing particular
glycosylation gene products in a cell. Gain-of-function mutants may of course
be generated by transfection of cDNAs encoding glycosylation genes, and
reduced expression of any gene can be achieved by the use of RNA interference
(RNAi), antisense cDNA strategies, or gene editing. Although extremely
valuable, the latter approaches generally target only known genes, whereas
cell-based selections or screens make it possible to discover new genes by
screening for phenotypic changes directly related to glycosylation changes.
Additionally, cells and mutants with well-characterized glycosylation pathways
are ideal hosts for investigating the activity encoded by a putative
glycosylation gene identified in genome sequence databases. These mutant cells
also provide a platform to test the severity of human mutations in a
complementation test: the normal human gene rescues defective glycosylation
when transfected into the mutant cell, but the same gene with a pathological
mutation does not. Thus, somatic cell mutants provide access to novel genes
involved in glycosylation, which in turn guide strategies for sophisticated
gene-manipulation experiments in animals. By combining the two approaches, the
biological function of a particular glycosyltransferase, sugar residue, or
lectin can be defined. Coupled with powerful mass spectrometry techniques for
determining glycan structures ([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)) from small
samples of tissue or cells, glycosylation mutants of cells and animals provide
complementary material for structure/function analyses and identifying
mechanistic bases of glycan functions in mammals.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Carolyn R. Bertozzi and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from
Michelle Dookwah, Chengcheng Huang, and Krithika Vaidyanathan.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.050

This chapter surveys methods for the structural characterization of glycans,
including residue composition, linkage types, and attachment to aglycones. It
covers methods for detection of specific glycan sequences on glycoproteins and
cellular surfaces, and it covers methods for characterizing structures in
three dimensions. The methods vary widely, ranging from classical chemical
methods for detection and characterization of glycans on isolated products, to
sensitive fluorescence methods used in combination with glycan-binding
proteins and microscopy on cells and tissues. Methods also include nuclear
magnetic resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry
([MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/)) approaches that allow
more detailed structural characterization.

The primary structure of a glycan is defined by the nature and order of
constituent monosaccharide residues, by the configuration and position of
glycosidic linkages, and by the nature and location of nonglycan entities to
which they are attached (aglycones; [Chapters 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/) and
[3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/)). Beyond this, different glycans can be attached to
different sites on a glycoprotein, and these glycans can vary when that
glycoprotein is made in different cell types or at different stages of
development. Moreover, it is often three-dimensional (3D) features, or
particular surface distributions of glycans, that are recognized by glycan-
binding proteins. Characterization of these diverse structural features
requires an array of different methods, with the choice of methodology
depending very much on the problem.

For a typical mammalian glycoprotein, the aim is often to identify the correct
structure from a range of known or predictable candidate structures, and a
limited amount of structural data may suffice ([Chapter
51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)). For glycans from bacteria or less well-
characterized organisms, it is hard to make predictions, and a more complete
data set may be required. Choice of methodology also depends on the amount and
purity of material available, as well as the context in which data must be
collected (e.g., tissue surface vs. isolated glycoprotein). If quantities are
not limiting, the complete primary structure and even the tertiary (3D)
structure may be determined. The need to respond to these diverse
circumstances and to understand this more complex picture of glycan structure
has driven the development of many of the methods described in the following
sections.

Methods for glycan detection in glycoconjugates include direct chemical
reactions with the constituent monosaccharides, metabolic labeling with either
radioactive or chemically reactive monosaccharides, and detection with
specific glycan-recognizing proteins (including lectins and antibodies)
([Chapter 48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)). A general method for detecting the
presence of glycans on proteins involves periodate oxidation of their hydroxyl
groups followed by Schiff base formation with amine- or hydrazide-based probes
([Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)). This chemical modification, also known as
the periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) reaction, can identify glycoproteins in gels.
Commercially available kits allow detection of 5–10 ng of glycoprotein, using
the periodate reaction with subsequent amplification by means of biotin-
hydrazide/streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase. [Lectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/lectin/) overlay of a blot of a sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel can detect the presence of specific glycans
with comparable sensitivity and greater specificity. For example, the
agglutinins from _Sambucus nigra_ (SNA) bind to glycans that terminate with
α2-6 sialic acid (Sia). Lectins ([Chapters
31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)–[36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)) recognizing terminal
fucose (Fuc), galactose (Gal), N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), and
N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) are also commercially available.

[Metabolic labeling](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/metaboliclabeling/) of
glycoconjugates with radioactive sugars is another powerful tool for
determining the composition of attached glycans. Cells incubated in media
containing 3H- or 14C-labeled monosaccharides will incorporate the label into
the glycans of glycoconjugates. A particularly powerful method has been the
use of [2-3H]mannose labeling, as all of the label remains in mannose and
fucose, or becomes vastly diluted in 56 m water. Radiolabeled glycans can be
detected following gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) or thin-layer chromatography
(TLC) by autoradiography or fluorography. They can also be released and
studied in significant detail by various methods. Proteins with a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor may also be selectively labeled with
radioactive precursors such as _myo_ -inositol or ethanolamine ([Chapter
12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). Glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains on proteoglycans
([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) can be metabolically labeled with 35SO4
or 3H-glucosamine and separated from other glycoproteins by ion-exchange
chromatography or cetylpyridinium chloride/ethanol precipitation. In recent
years, the use of fluorescent probes and labels has enabled a reduction in the
use of radioisotopes in applications in which the detection and quantitative
determination of glycans, as opposed to glycosylation pathway information, is
the primary objective. Fluorescent labels for sensitive detection of glycans
after liquid chromatography (LC) include the readily available 2-amino benzoic
acid (2-AA) and 2-aminobenzamide (2-AB), that may be attached to reducing
sugars by reductive amination following release from an aglycone.

[Metabolic labeling](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/metaboliclabeling/) can also
be performed with synthetic monosaccharides that are modified with chemically
reactive groups. For example, the azido monosaccharide
N-azidoacetylmannosamine (ManNAz) is converted by cells to N-azidoacetyl Sia,
which is incorporated into sialylated glycans in place of a natural Sia. The
azide group can then be selectively reacted with phosphine or alkyne reagents
([Chapter 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/)) that introduce a fluorescent dye or an
affinity probe such as biotin, thereby enabling detection of the sialic acid.
Azido analogs of GalNAc and GlcNAc can be used to label O-GalNAc glycans
([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) and O-GlcNAc ([Chapters
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/) and [19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)), respectively. Use
of fluorescent labels can also be coupled with confocal microscopy to give
important insight into the location of glycans in cells and tissues. However,
such modifications may change the biosynthesis and/or biology of glycans they
are on, creating some uncertainity about the observed results. In the final
analysis no method has completely supplanted radioactive metabolic labeling
for pulse-chase studies of some naturally occurring glycans.

A glycosylated protein typically presents one or more diffuse bands during gel
electrophoresis, resulting from heterogeneity of the attached glycans. Even
when visualized by protein staining reagents, this phenomenon is often the
first indication of the presence of glycans. Some glycoconjugates of very high
molecular weight, such as mucins and proteoglycans, do not enter ordinary gels
or, if they do, they migrate as heterogeneous smears. Agarose gels or
combination polyacrylamide-agarose gels may be useful in this situation.
Several analytical options are available to investigate the presence of
glycans further (e.g., the PAS stain described above). Treatment of
glycoproteins with endoglycosidases (e.g., peptide-N-glycosidase F [PNGase F],
endoglycosidase F2 [Endo F2], endoglycosidase H [Endo H]; see [Table
50.1](/books/NBK453059/table/CH50TB1/?report=objectonly) and [Figure
50.1](/books/NBK453059/figure/ch50.f1/?report=objectonly)) is another option.
If this results in a mobility change of one or more of the bands on the gel,
the presence of N-glycans is indicated. O-glycanase (endo-α-N-
acetylgalactosaminidase; [Table
50.1](/books/NBK453059/table/CH50TB1/?report=objectonly)) can be used for the
specific identification of O-glycans, sometimes requiring pretreatment with
other enzymes to expose the disaccharide core. Removal of individual sugars by
exoglycosidases such as sialidase or β-galactosidase ([Figure
50.1](/books/NBK453059/figure/ch50.f1/?report=objectonly)) may also result in
a mobility change depending on the number of residues removed. However, some
glycans cannot be detected by these treatments as they are resistant to the
enzymes used. Resistance can result from modifications to glycan hydroxyl
groups (e.g., sulfation, acetylation, or phosphorylation; [Chapter
2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)), glycosidic linkages that are not recognized by the
enzymes, or steric inaccessibility of the glycan. Complete removal of N- and
O-glycans can be achieved by chemical treatments (e.g., hydrazinolysis or
β-elimination) but peptide damage usually precludes further analysis by gel
electrophoresis. The glycan may also be partially degraded (e.g., by loss of
O-acetylation).

Proteoglycans ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) may be separated by
agarose gel electrophoresis and by ion-exchange chromatography, which
separates on the basis of charge conferred by sulfate groups. Treatment of
proteoglycans with GAG lyases ([Table
50.1](/books/NBK453059/table/CH50TB1/?report=objectonly)) will produce a shift
in mobility on a gel, condensing the proteoglycan smear into discrete bands.
After removal of much of the glycan portion, antibodies that recognize the
remaining “stub” glycans may be used in western analysis.

Typically, the analysis of glycolipid glycans by
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) or
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) is preceded by their
purification using chromatographic methods. Mixtures of glycolipids can be
fractionated by TLC, and staining of TLC plates with glycan-reactive reagents
may allow detection of individual glycolipids. Using different reagents, it is
possible to recognize gangliosides (e.g., resorcinol-HCl detects Sia) or
neutral monosaccharides (e.g., orcinol-sulfuric acid detects all
monosaccharides) in a TLC band. Reagents are also available for detection of
sulfate and phosphate groups on glycolipids. Some prepurification of the crude
extract is usually preferred (e.g., Folch partitioning and ion-exchange
chromatography). These procedures separate nonpolar or nonionic lipids from
polar lipids (e.g., glycosphingolipids; [Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/))
and those that contain charged groups (i.e., gangliosides, phospholipids, and
sulfatides). It is also common practice to deduce the presence of specific
sugars by evaluating the shifts produced in the migration position of a band
following a chemical or enzymatic treatment. Glycolipids on TLC plates can
also be detected by monoclonal antibodies, lectins, or even intact
microorganisms expressing glycan-specific receptors that recognize specific
glycan features ([Chapter 48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)). Detailed structural
features may be identified by running the TLC in a second dimension following
a specific treatment. On a larger scale, glycolipids are separated using
column chromatography or by high-performance TLC on silica plates.

GPI-anchored proteins ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)), with their lipid,
protein, and glycan moieties, have unique physicochemical properties that can
be exploited for their detection. The nonionic detergent Triton X-114 at low
temperature (4°C) extracts soluble and integral membrane proteins as well as
GPI-anchored proteins. When the solution is warmed, two phases separate, and
GPI-anchored and other amphiphilic proteins remain associated with the
detergent-enriched phase. GPI-specific phospholipases can be used to cleave
GPI anchors for further characterization. Successful cleavage by GPI-specific
phospholipases can be assessed by subsequently analyzing samples by SDS-PAGE,
because removal of the GPI anchor causes a shift in molecular mass. This is a
common diagnostic method for identifying the presence of a GPI anchor on a
protein of interest. Another method is to treat the GPI-anchored protein with
nitrous acid, which cleaves the unsubstituted glucosamine residue that links
the glycan to the phosphatidylinositol.

This class of glycans contains many structures, including homo- and
heteropolysaccharides, neutral and ionic polysaccharides, and linear and
branched structures, with widespread molecular sizes ranging from a few
monosaccharide units to thousands ([Chapters 3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/),
[21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/), and [22](/books/n/glyco3/ch22/)). These
polysaccharides are typically extracted with water, salts, chaotropic agents,
or detergents and isolated by precipitation with alcohols. Detection is based
on refractive index (RI) or colorimetric reactions, because sample quantity is
not usually a limitation.

Once the presence and general type of glycan has been established, the next
challenge is to release specific types of glycans and separate different
classes in sufficient quantities for structural characterization.

When glycans are released before structural analysis, it is best to use a
quantitative release procedure that neither destroys nor alters the glycan.
Ideally, information regarding the type of linkage between the glycan and its
liberated protein or lipid should be retained, although this is not always
possible.

Glycolipids can often be isolated and characterized by
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) and/or
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) without the
need for release of glycans, but if necessary enzymatic methods can be used,
or for glycosphingolipids, ozonolysis will separate lipid from glycan.

Complex, hybrid and oligomannose N-glycans can be released from glycoproteins
with N-glycosidases such as PNGase F or PNGase A. Endo H may be used for the
selective release of high-mannose and hybrid N-glycans, but complex N-glycans
are resistant ([Figure
50.1](/books/NBK453059/figure/ch50.f1/?report=objectonly)).

Chemical approaches suitable for release of glycans from a protein include
hydrazinolysis, which releases N-glycans and/or O-glycans, depending on the
experimental conditions. Strong base treatment can, under carefully controlled
conditions, release only O-glycans in a process called β-elimination; it is
generally accompanied by reduction with borohydride to give an alditol. More
recently methods have been developed in which base treatment is accompanied by
derivatization with pyrazolone, which acts as a UV-absorbing label during
chromatographic separation. However, all of the chemical methods can result in
partial or complete loss of labile modifications, such as O-acetylation or
sulfation.

Glycans released from a glycoconjugate usually form a complex mixture. Even
when only one glycosylation site in the protein is occupied, individual
molecules can bear different glycan species generating multiple glycoforms.
The high-throughput analysis of these glycan mixtures using glycomics
technologies is described in [Chapter 51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/).

Preparation of individual glycan samples for structural analysis, whatever
their source, will rely on separation techniques. Chromatographic separations
commonly used to isolate pure glycans, or at least glycan mixtures of reduced
complexity, include size exclusion chromatography (SEC), strong or weak anion
exchange chromatography (SAX or WAX), and some forms of reverse-phase high-
pressure liquid chromatography ([HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/)). Electrophoretic methods include
capillary electrophoresis ([CE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/capillaryelectrophoresisce/)) and fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate
electrophoresis ([FACE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/fluorophoreassistedcarbohydrateelectrophoresisface/)).

[HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/)-based separation is feasible, even
for large samples (>10 mg), if the mixture contains fewer than ∼50 glycan
species. Individual fractions can be recovered for further structural analysis
by [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) or
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/). Once
liberated from their glycoconjugates, glycans with free-reducing termini
([Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)) can be chemically labeled with fluorescent
tags, such as 2-amino-pyridine (2-AP) or 2-AB, providing detection sensitivity
that rivals the sensitivity achieved with radiolabels. Advantages of this
method include more facile purification of the labeled glycans and a wider
variety of options for chromatographic separations and structural analysis
techniques. Nonlabeled glycans may be detected by (relatively insensitive) RI
methods, or by more sensitive pulsed amperometric detection (PAD).

If a label is introduced at the reducing end, it is possible to use sequential
exoglycosidase treatments ([Figure
50.1](/books/NBK453059/figure/ch50.f1/?report=objectonly)) and look for shifts
of the oligosaccharide in a chromatographic system (e.g., paper
chromatography, [HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/), TLC) as an indication of
susceptibility to the enzyme. Comparison with known standards treated in the
same manner allows tentative glycan identification. However, well-
characterized standards of known structure are difficult to obtain in a pure
form and there are nearly always “contaminating” peaks in a chromatogram that
cannot be readily identified. It is very important to note that separation
profiling should not be confused with actual structural analysis, because
coelution with a standard could occur with a variety of different structures.

Some qualitative information on monosaccharide composition of a glycan may be
derived from the procedures described above. However, it is often convenient
and informative to determine monosaccharide composition without prior release
of glycans. After total hydrolysis of a glycan into its monosaccharide
constituents, colorimetric reactions can be used to determine the total amount
of hexose, hexuronic acid, or hexosamine in a sample. These approaches only
require common reagents and a spectrophotometer, but determination of total
glycan content may not always be accurate because of variations in the
sensitivities of different linkages to hydrolysis, variations in the
degradation of individual saccharides, or a lack of specificity and/or
sensitivity in the assays.

Quantitative monosaccharide analysis provides estimated molar ratios of
individual monosaccharide components of glycans and may suggest the presence
of specific oligosaccharide classes (e.g., N-glycans vs. O-glycans). The
analysis involves the following steps: cleavage of all glycosidic linkages
(typically by acid hydrolysis), fractionation of the resulting
monosaccharides, detection, and quantification. Since the early 1960s, a
variety of gas chromatography (GC) methods have been developed to quantify
monosaccharides. The most useful involve coupling of GC and
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) for linkage and
composition information. GC requires volatile samples so the monosaccharides
are first chemically modified at their hydroxyl, amide, carboxyl, and aldehyde
groups. Reduction of the aldehyde of free monosaccharides followed by
acetylation of their hydroxyl groups provides derivatives termed “alditol
acetates.” These modified monosaccharides can be readily analyzed by GC-MS and
compared with authentic standards. The hydroxyl and amino groups of free
monosaccharides generated by glycan hydrolysis can also be converted to
trimethylsilyl ethers. These per-O-trimethylsilyl derivatives are widely used
for monosaccharide compositional analysis by GC-MS. Incorporation of an
optically pure chiral aglycone (e.g., [–]-2-butyl alcohol), in combination
with trimethylsilylation, allows the GC separation of the D and L isomers and
thus determination of the absolute configuration of each monosaccharide.

An alternative to GC-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) is
high-pH anion-exchange chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection
(HPAEC-PAD), a special type of ion exchange chromatography which does not
require monosaccharide derivatization. This technique is especially useful for
analyzing acidic sugars such as Sia, which are refractive to GC-MS. A
convenient method for quantitating Sia, that does not require expensive
equipment, involves tagging with 1,2-diamino-4,5-methylene-dioxybenzene and
measuring fluorescence. This method has a detection sensitivity in the
femtomole range, and can also pick up many of the common naturally occurring
modifications of this diverse class of monosaccharides ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). Other popular techniques for defining
monosaccharide composition are [HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/) and high-performance capillary
electrophoresis (HPCE). The monosaccharides are usually tagged with
fluorescent derivatives for high-sensitivity detection. Tagging with
8-amino-1,3,6-naphthalene trisulfonic acid yields anionic derivatives that can
be conveniently analyzed by gel electrophoresis. This is referred to as
fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis
([FACE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/fluorophoreassistedcarbohydrateelectrophoresisface/)).

[Linkage analysis](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/linkageanalysis/) is a well-
established and ingenious approach for determining linkage positions. The
principle of this method is to introduce a stable substituent (an ether-linked
methyl group) onto each free hydroxyl group of the native glycan. Glycosidic
linkages are then cleaved by acid hydrolysis, producing partially methylated
monosaccharides with free hydroxyl groups at the positions that were
previously involved in a linkage. The partially methylated monosaccharides are
ring-opened with a reducing agent (normally borodeuteride) to introduce a new
hydroxyl group and, more importantly, a deuterium atom at C-1, which helps
identify the reducing end of each monosaccharide. All the free hydroxyl groups
are then acetylated resulting in partially methylated alditol acetates (PMAAs)
that can be identified by a combination of GC retention times and electron
impact (EI)-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) ([Figure
50.2](/books/NBK453059/figure/ch50.f2/?report=objectonly)). The masses of
fragments produced by impact of high-energy electrons on PMAAs identify
substitution sites in some cases, but fragmentation patterns of similarly
substituted isomeric monosaccharides (e.g., Glc and Gal) can be nearly
identical. Thus, definitive identification of monosaccharides requires, in
addition to the analysis of the MS pattern, the comparison of GC retention
times with those of known standards (e.g., all peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-
methyl-hexoses produce the same EI-MS spectrum, but peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-
methylgalactitol elutes later than peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-methylglucitol).
This type of analysis identifies terminal residues (they are methylated at
every position except the hydroxyl group at C-1 and the ring oxygen),
indicates how each monosaccharide is substituted, including the occurrence of
linkage and branching points, and allows the determination of the ring size
(pyranose [ _p_ ] or furanose [ _f_ ]) for each monosaccharide. However,
linkage analysis provides no sequence information and cannot determine the α-
or β-anomeric configuration.

EI-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) in monosaccharide
composition and linkage analyses is covered above. In this section, three
other types of ionization used in MS—fast atom bombardment (FAB), matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization ([MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)), and electrospray
ionization ([ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrosprayionizationesi/))—are described. All three technologies permit
the direct ionization of nonvolatile substances, and are applicable to intact
glycoconjugates, as well as fragments thereof. FAB-MS was the first to be
developed and was the premier MS method for sequencing glycans and
glycoconjugates through the 1980s and 1990s. Although FAB-MS has now been
largely replaced by ESI-MS and MALDI-MS (which offer greater sensitivity and
applicability to high molecular weight glycans and glycoconjugates), the
latter techniques continue to exploit sample handling strategies originally
developed for FAB-MS. In addition, the knowledge of glycan fragmentation
pathways that emerged from the FAB-MS research of the 1980s underpins today's
ESI- and MALDI-MS analyses. Among the structural features that can be defined
by MS methods are (1) degree of heterogeneity and type of glycosylation (e.g.,
N-glycan vs. O-glycan; oligomannose, hybrid, or complex N-glycans); (2) sites
of glycosylation and identity of the protein/lipid carrier; (3) glycan
branching; (4) the number and lengths of antennae, their composition, and
substitution with Fuc, Sia, or other capping groups such as sulfate,
phosphate, or acetyl esters; and (5) complete sequences of individual glycans.

In the FAB-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) experiment,
samples are dissolved in a liquid matrix and ionization/desorption is effected
by a high-energy beam of particles fired from an atom or ion gun. In
[MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)-MS experiments, the sample
is dried on a metal target in the presence of a light-absorbing matrix until
matrix crystals containing trapped sample molecules are formed. Ionization of
the sample is effected by energy transfer from matrix molecules that have
absorbed energy from laser pulses. MALDI-MS is the preeminent technique for
screening for molecular ions in complex mixtures and it is a powerful tool for
glycomic profiling ([Chapter 51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)). For
[ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/electrosprayionizationesi/)-MS, a stream of
liquid containing the sample enters the source through a capillary interface,
where the sample molecules are stripped of solvent, leaving them as multiply
charged species. ESI-MS can be coupled to nano- or capillary-bore LC
permitting online LC/ESI-MS analysis. This method is particularly useful when
complex mixtures of peptides and glycopeptides are being examined (e.g., after
proteolytic digestion of a glycoprotein).

In principle, [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) provides
two types of structural information—the masses of intact molecules (the
molecular ions) and the masses of fragment ions. However, in both
[ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/electrosprayionizationesi/)\- and
[MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)-MS, the ionization process
is usually not sufficiently energetic for fragment ion formation. To overcome
this, ESI and MALDI instruments normally have two analyzers in tandem, which
allows detection by the second analyzer, of fragment ions produced after
molecular ions selected by the first analyzer undergo collisions with an inert
gas in a chamber placed between the two analyzers. This is referred to as
collision-activated dissociation (CAD) or collision-induced dissociation
(CID). MALDI-MS/MS is commonly performed on instruments that have two time-of-
flight ([TOF](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/timeofflighttof/)) analyzers in
tandem (TOF-TOF), whereas the most popular instruments for ESI-MS/MS have
either a quadrupole (Q) as the first analyzer and an orthogonal TOF as the
second analyzer (QTOF) or a linear ion trap as the first analyzer and an
Orbitrap as the second analyzer (LTQ-Orbitrap). Some MS/MS instruments have a
single “ion trap” analyzer that traps ions and functions as the collision
chamber. Ion traps are relatively inexpensive but they lack the sensitivity,
versatility, and mass range of most tandem instruments. The Fourier transform
mass spectrometer (FTMS), a very expensive but very powerful instrument, has
extremely high mass accuracy. An alternative to CAD for fragment ion
production has been developed for FTMS. This is called electron capture
dissociation (ECD) and involves the capture of an electron by the multiply
charged molecular ion. A related technique, called electron transfer
dissociation ([ETD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrontransferdissociationetd/)) was subsequently developed for tandem
instruments. Both ECD and ETD yield radical cations generated by different
fragmentation pathways than ions produced by CAD. ECD and ETD are especially
useful for defining glycosylation sites in glycopeptides.

Although underivatized glycans can be analyzed by
[MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)\- or
[ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrosprayionizationesi/)-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/)/MS, superior data can be obtained if the glycans are
derivatized before MS analysis. Derivatization methods can be broadly divided
into two categories: (1) “tagging” of reducing ends and (2) protection of all
functional groups. Commonly used tagging reagents include p-aminobenzoic acid
ethyl ester, 2-AP and 2-AB. This type of derivatization facilitates
chromatographic purification and enhances useful fragmentation. Protection of
hydroxyl groups by permethylation is by far the most important type of full
derivatization used in glycan MS (although with accompanying destruction of
acetyl esters and other base-labile functional groups during the
derivatization process). In MS/MS experiments, permethylated derivatives form
abundant fragment ions produced by cleavage at susceptible glycosidic
linkages, notably on the reducing side of each HexNAc residue. In N- and
O-glycans, this preferred fragmentation unambiguously establishes the antennae
sequences.

Broadly speaking, the unique strengths of [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/) can be exploited in two general ways in
glycobiology. The first is to obtain detailed characterization of purified
individual glycans, or mixtures of glycans. In this type of study, it is
essential to acquire sufficient rigorous data to define structure
unambiguously; many different MS-based experiments will be required, often
complemented by [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/), linkage analysis, and profiling of enzyme
digests. The second is to pursue glycomics investigations in situations in
which it may not be essential to define structures fully, and high-throughput
glycomic profiling or mass-mapping procedures can be exploited ([Chapter
51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)).

[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) spectroscopy
is a powerful tool capable of full de novo structural characterization of
isolated glycans and simple glycan mixtures. Among its several advantages are
its broad applicability (glycans contain an abundance of protons, the most
easily detected magnetic nucleus), its nondestructive nature, the quantitative
relationship between resonance intensity and residue concentration, the
diverse set of experiments available, and the ability to return information on
both primary and tertiary structure. Its principal limitation is sensitivity,
typically requiring several nanomoles of glycan for even the simplest
experiment directed at structure determination. However, there are emerging
experiments using methods, such as dynamic nuclear polarization, that provide
several orders of magnitude improvement in sensitivity for applications that
can monitor rapid in vivo conversions of metabolites such as glucose and
fructose. Other limitations for both structural and metabolic applications are
the relatively high cost of spectrometers and the level of expertise required
for acquiring and interpreting NMR spectra.

When small amounts of sample are available and the source of the sample is
known, the acquisition of a 1D proton [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) spectrum, combined with simple 2D coupling
correlated spectroscopy ([COSY](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/couplingcorrelatedspectroscopycosy/)) or total correlation spectroscopy
(TOCSY), can frequently identify a glycan. [Figure
50.3](/books/NBK453059/figure/ch50.f3/?report=objectonly) shows a 1D proton
NMR spectrum collected on 30 µg of PNGase F-released N-glycans from the Fc
fragment of a human IgG1 antibody engineered to have a near homogeneous glycan
compostion. The collection required ∼20 min on a currently state-of-the-art
spectrometer (900 MHz with a cryoprobe). The anomeric proton resonances appear
in a well-resolved region of the spectrum and show characteristic doublets
with a splitting that is small for most α anomers and is significantly larger
for most β anomers. Thus, a first glance at the 1H-NMR spectrum gives a good
estimate of how many residues there are (one anomeric proton per residue
except for Sia), and how many of them belong to each anomeric type.
Connections from the anomeric (H1) resonances to the H2 and subsequently other
resonances can usually be determined from simple COSY or TOCSY data, which
show chemical shifts (resonance positions) for these protons as cross peaks on
columns or rows emanating from an anomeric resonance (an ∼24-h acquisition in
the example given). The downfield (higher ppm) position and small couplings of
the H2 resonances connected by cross peaks to three of the α-anomeric
resonances identify these as belonging to core Man residues of an N-glycan.
These, including other easily resolved resonances (historically called
reporter group resonances), are sensitive to both monosaccharide type and
linkage type, and often prove sufficient to identify a glycan, particularly
when options are restricted by knowledge of biosynthetic pathways in the
system under study.

Accessible structures are more diverse in other organisms (e.g., bacteria and
plants), and it is often advantageous to include 13C chemical shifts. These
can be correlated with resonances of directly bonded protons using 2D
heteronuclear single quantum coherence ([HSQC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/heteronuclearsinglequantumcoherencehsqc/)) spectra. 13C is magnetically
active, but 13C spectroscopy is less sensitive than proton spectroscopy, so
chemical shifts are indirectly detected through protons. Even with the
improved detection, 13C is just 1% naturally abundant, and unless the sample
is isotopically enriched, approximately two orders of magnitude more material
is required for collection of these data. Web-based tools that rely on
empirical rules or databases that correlate chemical shifts with structural
features now exist, and these allow facile prediction of possible structures
from 1D and 2D [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) data sets (e.g., CASPER).

When unprecedented structures emerge, it is also possible to perform a de novo
structure determination using [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) data alone. This usually begins with a full
assignment of the 1H and 13C resonances for each residue of a glycan using a
combination of [COSY](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/couplingcorrelatedspectroscopycosy/), TOCSY, and
[HSQC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/heteronuclearsinglequantumcoherencehsqc/)
spectra. In addition, the two-dimensional heteronuclear multiple-bond
correlation (HMBC) experiment is used to detect through-bond coupling between
the anomeric proton and the carbon atom on the opposite side of the glycosidic
linkage. This is, however, an even less sensitive and more time-consuming
experiment. It is possible to avoid both 13C-based HSQC and HMBC experiments
by substituting a 2D nuclear Overhauser effect ([NOE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearoverhausereffectnoe/)) spectrum or its rotating frame analog, an
ROE spectrum. These experiments correlate proton resonances based on
interproton distances, as opposed to through-bond couplings; they typically
show cross peaks for pairs of protons that are within ∼4 Å of one another.
Most connections are between protons in the same residue, but typically an
extra connection will be between an anomeric proton and a proton in another
residue. This proton is frequently across the glycosidic bond at the linkage
site, providing a way to assemble residues into a complete structure. However,
caution must be exercised. The identification of linkage sites is not as
definitive as with 13C-based experiments, because the distance for the trans-
glycosidic pair is dependent on glycosidic torsion angles, and these NOE cross
peaks can be weak. Also, other non-linkage site protons can come within NOE
distance and give false identification.

The same [NOE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearoverhausereffectnoe/) cross
peaks that assist in identifying linkages between residues can, in principle,
be used to define the tertiaryl (3D) structure of a glycan. However, the
interpretation is complicated by the presence of internal molecular motion,
resulting in many different conformations in solution. This motion is nicely
illustrated in ϕ, ψ energy plots much like the Ramachandran plots used to
describe the energetics of torsional angles in the polypeptide backbone of a
protein. For glycans, these plots are usually based on parameterized functions
that represent a combination of quantum mechanical and experimental data. Such
a plot is shown for a Glcβ1-4Glc linkage in [Figure
50.4](/books/NBK453059/figure/ch50.f4/?report=objectonly). The minima in these
plots correlate well with angles found in structures of glycans deposited in
databases such as the Cambridge Structural Database or the Protein Data Bank
([PDB](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/proteindatabankpdb/)). Thermal energies
are ∼0.6 kcal, so in solution, states within ∼1.4 kcal of the minimum have
appreciable populations (>10%), representing a ±20° variation in torsion
angles of the Glcβ1-4Glc linkage. In [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) experiments, intensities of NOE cross peaks
are roughly proportional to the average of the inverse sixth power of the
distance sampled over these states, and the steep distance dependence results
in skewing distances toward smaller numbers. Nevertheless, NOEs, particularly
those representing close approach of remote parts of larger glycans, can guide
construction of 3D structural models. Convenient tools for building structures
are available, such as the carbohydrate builder of the GLYCAM package. Initial
structures can be further refined with molecular mechanics or molecular
dynamics packages, or they can be manipulated in common molecular graphics
packages to match solution data coming from NOEs and other NMR measurements,
including residual dipolar couplings and paramagnetic effects, which provide
angular and long range distance constraints respectively ([Chapter
30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)).

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Carolyn R. Bertozzi and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from
Morten Thaysen-Andersen, Keisuke Mizote, Arun Everest-Dass, and Anne Q. Phan.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.051

The term “glycomics” currently describes studies designed to define the
complete repertoire of glycans that a cell or tissue produces under specified
conditions of time, location, and environment.
“[Glycoproteomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycoproteomics/)” describes
this glycome as it appears on the cellular proteome. Glycoproteomics
determines which sites on each glycoprotein of a cell are glycosylated and
ideally includes the identification and quantitation of each glycan structure
at each site on the heterogeneous glycoforms in the cell. This complexity
makes glycomics and glycoproteomics both exciting and daunting. Because
neither the proteome nor the transcriptome can accurately predict such a
moving target, the glycome and glycoproteome must be analyzed directly, and
the techniques used to characterize the glycome and glycoproteome are
described in this chapter. Analyses of glycolipids and free glycans are
described in other chapters.

The term genomics arose from the availability of complete genome sequence data
as well as computational methods for their analysis. Less than 2% of genes in
the human genome encode proteins. These genes are transcribed into messenger
RNAs (mRNAs) that make up the “transcriptome,” of which ∼30% are protein
coding. Parallel analysis of the genome and transcriptome has enabled
researchers to probe global differences in gene expression—for instance,
between healthy and diseased cells, between neurons and muscle cells, and
between drug-sensitive and drug-resistant cancer cells. Such comparisons have
revealed networks of genes whose expression is linked to a condition.

The total proteins expressed by the cell are collectively termed the
“proteome.” Most eukaryotic proteins are posttranslationally modified (e.g.,
by phosphorylation, sulfation, oxidation, ubiquitination, acetylation,
methylation, lipidation, or glycosylation). These modifications, combined with
alternative splicing in eukaryotes, render the proteome considerably more
complex than the transcriptome. It is estimated that approximately 120,000
proteins (including isoforms) are expressed by a human cell, but there is no
estimate of the number of modified forms of each protein. The systems-level
analysis of all proteins expressed by cells, tissues, or organisms is known as
“proteomics.” The proteome, like the transcriptome, but unlike the DNA
sequence of the genome, is fundamentally dynamic. The repertoire of proteins
expressed by a cell is highly dependent on tissue type, microenvironment, and
stage within the life cycle. As cells receive cues in the form of growth
factors, hormones, metabolites, or cell–cell interactions, various genes are
modulated and may be transcribed at levels ranging from silence to more than
104 mRNA copies per cell and 107 protein molecules per cell. Thus, proteomes
vary during cell differentiation, activation, trafficking, and malignant
transformation.

Vertebrates synthesize N- and O-glycans, glycosaminoglycans, and
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors covalently attached to proteins, as
well as lipid-linked glycans and free glycans, such as hyaluronan ([Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)–[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). As with the proteome,
each cell type has its own distinct glycome that is governed by local cues and
the metabolic state of the cell. Other organisms have distinct glycomes; those
of plants ([Chapter 24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)) and prokaryotes ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)) are distinctly different from the vertebrate and
invertebrate glycomes ([Chapters
25](/books/n/glyco3/ch25/)–[27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)). The size of any
particular glycome has not yet been established, but the combinatorial
possibilities that can occur with numerous glycans on multiple glycosylation
sites on each protein (the glycoproteome), means that determining a “complete”
glycome is not straightforward.

The notion that glycans should be studied as a totality (glycomics), as well
as simply one glycan or glycoprotein at a time, developed when it became
apparent that glycans form patterns on cells that change during development
([Chapter 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)), cancer progression ([Chapter
47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)), infection ([Chapters 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)
and [43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)), and many other diseases ([Chapters
44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)–[46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/)). Many glycan-binding
proteins, such as lectins, are oligomerized on the cell surface and interact
with multivalent arrays of glycans on opposing cells ([Chapters
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)–[38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)). Sometimes, multiple
discrete glycans work together to engage two cells or to deliver a signal from
one cell to the other. Thus, the term “glycomics” was coined to describe the
many aspects of glycobiology that can be understood only with a systems-level
analysis. No systems-level analysis of a biological process is complete
without interrogating the glycome and the glycoproteome in addition to the
genome, transcriptome, and proteome. Methods for systemic analysis of the
total cellular glycolipids ([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)),
glycophospholipids ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)), free glycans
([Chapter 3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/)), plant glycans ([Chapter
24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)), and prokaryotic polysaccharides ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)) are mentioned in the respective chapters.

Clues regarding the composition and complexity of the glycome are found in the
genome, transcriptome, and proteome of a cell. Thus, if a gene encoding a
glycosyltransferase is not expressed (absent from the transcriptome), no
glycans in the cell can carry the sugar transferred by that
glycosyltransferase. The combinatorial action of glycosyltransferases in many
competing biosynthetic pathways renders the complete glycome impossible to
predict with current tools and knowledge. As an example, the reduced
expression of a single glycosyltransferase can perturb the biosynthesis of
dozens of glycans. Furthermore, unlike the genome, the glycome is sensitive to
exogenous nutrient levels and metabolic fluxes including salvage pathways.
Thus, variations in dietary monosaccharides, such as glucose, galactose,
glucosamine, fucose, mannose, and _N_ -glycolylneuraminic acid ([Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)), change the composition of the glycome. The
numerous factors that influence the glycome (the transcriptome, the proteome,
environmental nutrients, as well as the secretory machinery, pH, and many
other determinants) create a glycome that is highly diverse and dynamic. Thus,
the glycome and glycoproteome of a cell can change dramatically over time. It
is this enormous structural plasticity in response to cellular and
environmental states that underlies the essential roles of glycans in
development and disease processes.

The term “glycomics” in the context of this chapter thus describes studies to
define the complete repertoire of glycans that a cell produces under specified
conditions of time, location, and environment.
“[Glycoproteomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycoproteomics/)” describes
studies to elucidate the glycome on the whole cellular proteome level, also
under specified conditions of time, location, and environment. Glycoproteomics
determines which sites on each glycoprotein of a cell are glycosylated and,
ideally, the identity and quantity of the glycan at each site on the
heterogeneous glycoforms in the cell. This complexity makes glycomics and
glycoproteomics both exciting and daunting. Because neither the proteome nor
the transcriptome can accurately predict such a moving target, the glycome and
glycoproteome must be analyzed directly, whether on a single glycoprotein
([Figure 51.1](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f1/?report=objectonly)) or on a
complex mixture of glycoproteins ([Figure
51.2](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f2/?report=objectonly)). Techniques used to
characterize the glycome and glycoproteome in animal cells and tissues are
summarized below.

Because the glycome is influenced by both genetic and environmental factors,
the information contained therein sheds light on intraspecies and interspecies
variations, including providing indicators of disease that can be used for
diagnosis and for monitoring the efficacy of drugs. Comparative glycomics is
therefore an exciting frontier in biology and medicine.

For example, as discussed in detail in [Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/),
numerous changes in the glycome have been associated with malignancy and
metastasis, including altered N- and O-glycosylation, up-regulation of
sialylated and fucosylated glycans, and altered glycosaminoglycans (GAGs).
Regardless of functional consequence, a change in the glycome that is highly
correlated with malignancy (or any disease) can serve as a diagnostic
biomarker. Notably, glycans altered in a disease may reflect downstream
consequences of the disease on remote organs, changes in the patient's immune
system, or other effects of the disease.

One major caveat is the currently unknown extent of natural variation among
individual human glycomes. Because the glycome can respond, in principle, to
dietary and environmental changes, how do glycome variations relate to age,
gender, and acquired disease susceptibility ([Chapter
46](/books/n/glyco3/ch46/))? Studies of evolutionary biology also have much to
gain from comparative glycomics. Evolution of the vertebrate immune system,
for example, was accompanied by the acquisition of new glycan-binding
proteins, including the Siglec ([Chapter 35](/books/n/glyco3/ch35/)) and
selectin ([Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)) family members. Likewise, the
glycomes of microbes and their vertebrate hosts appear to have coevolved in
some instances ([Chapter 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)).

The glycome can be determined at different levels of granularity. First,
“glycomics” constructs an inventory of glycans separated from their protein or
lipid scaffolds from the cell, organ, or organism of interest. This is an
important starting point for any comprehensive glycome analysis. The second
level of analysis defines specific glycans associated with individual proteins
or lipids. Analysis of the complete repertoire of a cell's glycoproteins,
including their glycan structures and sites of attachment, lies at the
intersection of glycomics and proteomics (“glycoproteomics”). A third level of
complexity involves determining which glycans and/or glycoconjugates are
expressed in specific cells, tissues, or secretions at specific times. This
level of analysis is essential if the goal is to reveal new functions in
cell–cell communication or to correlate particular glycomes with specific
diseases. Of course, none of these approaches recapitulates the actual
complexity of glycan forest on the surface of cells or in extracellular
matrices. This level of organization of the glycome is currently only amenable
to imaging using various glycan-recognizing probes (GRPs; [Chapter
48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)) and more recently by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization ([MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)) mass spectrometric
imaging methods.

As described below, numerous techniques have been developed for interrogating
the glycome at these different levels. However, no single technique can define
all aspects of the glycome or glycoproteome. Thus, several approaches are
typically used in parallel, allowing one to assemble a picture of the glycome
both from the “bottom up” (i.e., from the individual cell glycan repertoire)
and from the “top down” (i.e., from a global tissue expression analysis). A
significant challenge in analyzing the glycome derives from its enormous
structural diversity and the heterogeneous sites of glycosylation. Different
approaches and techniques are required to characterize, for example, the
structures of glycoproteins versus glycolipids, N-glycans versus O-glycans,
and sulfated GAGs versus neutral glycans ([Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). In contrast, a technique such as RNA-seq (RNA
sequencing) can be used to quantitate all RNA transcripts at once, a much
easier task.

[Mass spectrometry](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) is now
the primary technique for characterizing the nature of individual glycans when
only small quantities are available, as is the case in most glycomic studies.
In a typical experiment, a glycoprotein- or glycolipid-enriched sample is
prepared from a cell lysate and analyzed by multiple rounds of mass
spectrometry ([Chapter 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). In the case of
glycoproteins, the N-glycans can be selectively released enzymatically or
chemically, separated by high-performance liquid chromatography
([HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/))
methods, and sequenced by mass spectrometry with or without glycosidase
treatments. Separately, the O-glycans may be released chemically and sequenced
in the same manner. Glycolipids can often be directly sequenced without
release from the lipid component. GAGs are more problematic because of their
large size, but smaller fragments can be sequenced by mass spectrometry in
conjunction with enzymatic digestion ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). An
advantage of mass spectrometric glycan profiling is that multiple different
glycans can be profiled at once, increasing the throughput of the glycomic
analysis. However, mass spectrometry of glycans may miss potentially important
modifications such as sulfation and O-acetylation depending on techniques
applied and has inherent challenges because of the isomeric nature of the
constituent monosaccharide units, linkage configurations, and positions.

Initially, the techniques for glycomic analyses have been mostly directed
toward protein glycosylation because of the current proteomics focus, although
considerable effort is being directed toward methods that encompass all glycan
classes. As a first step for characterization of mixtures of glycoproteins, a
liquid chromatography (LC) and/or mass spectrometry
([MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/)) glycomics experiment
is performed after glycans are released from the protein backbones. In this
way the nature of all N- and O-glycans synthesized by specific cells or
tissues can be characterized.

Depending on the level of detail desired, glycomics analyses may be divided
into basic classes: glycoprofiling, glycan class characterization, and full
structural analysis. Each provides a particular degree of information and the
relevant class depends on the particular question at hand.

  1. **Glycoprofiling** (fingerprinting, patterning) is the one-dimensional separation of a complex glycan mixture by a single technique to provide a signature or fingerprint that gives a simple overview or snapshot of the protein glycome. Technologies that provide different one-dimensional windows on this world are [HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/) (separation by physical parameters such as lipophilicity or charge), capillary electrophoresis (separation of labeled glycans by mass:charge ratio), and [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) (separation by mass/charge).

  2.  **[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) class characterization** uses technologies to separate glycan mixtures into types of glycans. Examples include [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) separations of di-, mono-, and nongalactosylated IgG glycans or the weak anion-exchange (WAX) LC separations that separate glycans into neutral, mono-, di-, tri-, and tetrasialylated structure types. This approach is a convenient way to highlight defined critical features and provide relative quantitation of the different glycan classes.

  3.  **Detailed (full) structural analysis** requires the determination of the monosaccharide sequence and modifications, anomericity, and linkage of the glycans in a glycome. In this detailed analysis, orthogonal technologies are usually required, first to assign preliminary structures and then to confirm the assignments. For example, an anion-exchange separation into differently charged glycan classes can be complemented by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatographic (HILIC) separation of each class. The digestion of aliquots of the pools by exoglycosidases can then be used to help determine the sequence, anomericity, and linkage of different glycans. On the other hand, [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) assigns compositions that are consistent with the mass data, and structural details can be resolved by electrospray ionization ([ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/electrosprayionizationesi/)) MS/MS ion fragmentation. Separate release and analysis of glycans with sialic acids that have labile modifications such as O-acetylation or polysialylation may be needed, if preparation for MS is likely to destroy them. Full structural analysis also can include absolute or relative quantitation of the assigned glycan structures such as, for example, the level of core fucose on antibodies designed to initiate antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), the levels of antigenic α-gal residues, or sialyl Lewis x epitopes that may be useful markers of inflammation and metastasis, or the specific structure of a bacterial binding protein.

Full structural analysis of glycans is challenging as different structures can
have the same mass, often coelute on separation systems, and can require
detailed annotation of [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/)/MS spectra. Usually glycans are given a preliminary
structural assignment from one technology and are then confirmed by at least
one orthogonal technology. Many bioinformatic tools are being developed to
mitigate this bottleneck ([Chapter 52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)).

The starting material in a glycomics analysis can be glycoproteins embedded in
SDS-PAGE (sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) gels,
whole cell lysates, homogenized tissue, enriched membranes, or serum and other
body fluids. For high-throughput analyses of the glycome, intact N-glycans are
most often released from glycoproteins using an amidase (peptide N-glycosidase
F [PNGase F]). PNGase F cleaves the linkage between the core GlcNAc and the
asparagine residue of all classes of N-glycans, with the exception of specific
N-glycans found in plant and insect glycoproteins that contain fucose α(1,3)
linked to the GlcNAc residue attached to the protein. PNGase A, an enzyme
extracted from almond emulsion, may be used to release all fucosylated
N-glycans from protease-generated glycopeptides. Treatment with other enzymes
that cleave between the two GlcNAc residues within the chitobiose core
(endoglycosidase D [endo D], which releases all classes of N-linked sugars,
endo H, which selectively cleaves oligomannose- and hybrid-type structures and
various types of endo F) is also possible. Before treatment, denaturation with
or without trypsin digestion can be used to relax the three-dimensional (3D)
structure of the protein and improve enzyme accessibility. N-glycans can also
be conveniently released from glycoproteins purified in SDS-PAGE bands. After
the N-glycans have been cleaved, the protein remaining in the gel can be
identified by traditional proteomics.

For O-linked glycans the release method of choice is the reductive
β-elimination of O-linked glycans from serine and threonine. Drawbacks of the
method include the fact that the O _-_ linked alditols cannot be further
labeled at the reducing end, and that labile modifications can be destroyed.
To date, there is no single enzyme that can release O _-_ linked glycans in
general. The enzyme O _-_ glycanase (in contrast to the PNGase enzymes) is
restricted to only simple core 1 (Galβ-14GalNAcαSer/Thr) release.

Labeling of released glycans can optimize [HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/) and capillary electrophoresis
([CE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/capillaryelectrophoresisce/)) detectability
and separability, and may improve [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/) properties. Many of these labeling approaches use
reductive amination of the monosaccharide at the reducing end or react the
free amine at the reducing end that is left after PNGase F release.
Fluorescent tags increase the sensitivity and limit of quantitation and
detection. Permethylation and peracetylation, when all the mobile protons
(present on hydroxides, carboxyls, and sometimes amides) in a glycan are
substituted by alkyls (e.g., -methyl) or esterified (e.g., -acetyl) converts
the glycans from being hydrophilic to hydrophobic, greatly improving
sensitivity and linkage determination by MS-based analyses.

Both N- and O-glycans can also be analyzed as alditols in which the reducing
end monosaccharide ring is converted into a reduced linear alditol by reducing
agents, such as sodium borohydride. This reduction increases
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) stability and removes
the anomeric ambiguity of the carbohydrate, where the α and β isomers of the
reducing end sugar may otherwise separate chromatographically.

Special protocols have also been developed to improve the quality of the
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) fragmentation spectra
of sialylated glycans, in particular to target the charged carboxyl group of
sialic acids. These can be converted into esters or amides to remove the
acidic proton of the carboxylic acid that destabilizes the sialic acid and
promotes nondesirable in-source or post-source fragmentation in MS/MS.

Tagging of the reducing ends of the released glycans, for example, with
2-aminobenzamide (2-AB), aminobenzoic acid (2-AA), or aminopyridine (2-PA), is
often used for HILIC and reversed-phase LC separations ([Figure
51.1](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f1/?report=objectonly)). Standard labeled
dextran oligomer ladders are commonly used in LC as external standards to help
define composition and size based on comparable retention times, for which an
“incremental value” can be calculated for each monosaccharide present in the
structure ([Figure 51.1](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f1/?report=objectonly)).

[CE](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/capillaryelectrophoresisce/) with laser-
induced fluorescence (LIF) can also provide efficient, rapid, and quantitative
separation of derivatized glycans. Glycans are mostly neutral structures so
coupling a charged fluorescent label such as 1-aminopyrene-3,6,8-trisulfonic
acid (APTS) is necessary to provide electrophoretic mobility and enables their
sensitive fluorescence detection. Further details can be assigned after
digestion of glycan mixtures by exoglycosidases used in arrays or singly.
These specifically cleave glycosidic bonds of individual monosaccharide units
from the terminal residue producing predictable shifts in the
[HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/) or
CE profiles of the digests.

The purpose of determining the molecular masses of oligosaccharides using
[MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)\- or
[ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrosprayionizationesi/)-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/) gives a picture of the molecular distribution of
glycans and allows a comparison of glycosylation between samples ([Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)). The limited number of masses of the
monosaccharide units ([Table
51.1](/books/NBK453015/table/CH51TB1/?report=objectonly)) makes combinatorial
translation of molecular ion masses to monosaccharide composition possible.
There are available search engines that can provide a suggested list of glycan
compositions based on an experimentally determined mass (e.g., GlycoMod;
[Chapter 52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)). MS, however, cannot distinguish between
isomeric monosaccharides, so a nomenclature for compositions has been adopted
with isomeric monosaccharides described by a single term or abbreviation. For
instance, all of the isomeric (6-carbon-containing) monosaccharides, such as
glucose, mannose, and galactose are given the unifying name of hexose (Hex)
([Table 51.1](/books/NBK453015/table/CH51TB1/?report=objectonly)).

Generic glycomic workflows using all the derivatization approaches described
above have been developed for [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/) analysis. Both the neutral and sialylated glycans in
a sample can be analyzed after permethylation and
[MALDI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/)-MS, where glycan masses
are detected as their singly charged alkali ion adducts in positive ion mode
(e.g., as [M+Na]+ ions or [M+K]+ ions). Negative ion
[ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/electrosprayionizationesi/)-MS is widely
adopted for intact alditols, where both neutral and sialylated are detected as
[M- _n_ H] _n_ − ions. The number of charges ( _n_ ) will increase with the
size of the molecule and is also dependent on the number of acidic moieties
present (e.g., sialic acids, sulfates, and phosphates). Positive ion MALDI-MS
without permethylation usually requires that sialic acid residues are
derivatized as described above to prevent their loss in-source.

To obtain orthogonal separations, [ESI](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrosprayionizationesi/)-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/) is often connected to
[HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/).
HILIC chromatography can be used for screening of reducing end derivatized
glycans and provides separation based on size, with some isomeric structure
resolution ([Figures 51.1](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f1/?report=objectonly)
and [51.2](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f2/?report=objectonly)). The
interaction between the glycans and the HILIC column is based on hydrophilic
hydrogen bonding. Using an alternate stationary phase of porous graphitized
carbon (PGC) can uniquely separate isomers of released glycan alditols. If
glycans are permethylated, the increased hydrophobicity allows separation
using conventional C18 reversed-phase chromatography.

[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) fragmentation is the
holy grail of characterization of oligosaccharides and the goal is to be able
to generate information-rich fragment spectra that will allow unequivocal
assignment of a glycan structure. However, in the current state of the art,
fragments from colliding carbohydrate molecular ions (collision-induced
dissociation [CID]—either “beam-type” or “ion trap-type”) can only partly
determine the structure of interest. We can distinguish three types of glycan
fragment ions depending on the type and amount of information they carry
([Figure 51.3](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f3/?report=objectonly)).

  1. Glycosidic fragments are assigned as containing the nonreducing end and not containing the glycosidic oxygen (a B-fragment) or a C-fragment when the glycosidic oxygen is included. Reducing end fragments are assigned as Y (with glycosidic oxygen) and Z (without glycosidic oxygen).

  2. Cross-ring fragments can be assigned as nonreducing end fragments A and reducing end fragments X.

  3. Internal fragments that occur from more than one fragmentation event from a combination of glycosidic and cross-ring fragmentation.

A fragmentation spectrum containing all possible glycosidic fragments would in
theory allow the complete assignment of the primary sequence and branching of
a glycan structure. In practice, most CID approaches provide glycosidic
fragments, but several methods or a combination of methods (retention times,
exoglycosidase digestions, ion mode, derivatization, multiple fragmentation
steps, i.e., [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) _n_ ) are
usually used to fully define a particular structure of interest.

A further challenge is that many key glycan modifications such as
O-acetylation, pyruvylation, etc., are labile to, and/or missed with, current
analytical methods. This problem can result in populating databases with
misleading information. As just one example, although many databases assume
that a sialic acid at the terminus of the vertebrate glycan chain is _N_
-acetylneuraminic acid, there are in fact dozens of kinds of modified sialic
acids in nature, and the differences can have profound effects on biological
functions ([Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). The same is true of N- and
O-sulfate esters on hexosamines ([Chapters 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/) and
[17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). It will take a while to address the analytical
challenges effectively. Meanwhile, it would make sense to not make definitive
assignments at any such ambiguous positions on glycan chains, but to use
generic terms such as “NulO,” “Sia,” or “HexNAc” and to assign their
corresponding white (generic) symbols in graphic depictions ([Online Appendix
1B](/books/n/glyco3/symbolnomenclature/)).

Releasing the carbohydrates from the protein(s) is currently a prerequisite
for glycomics. These described techniques are, however, complementary and
support the assignment of glycan structures still attached to glycopeptides,
the techniques for which are less well-developed and present greater
challenges (see below). N-linked and O-linked glycomics gives the overall
landscape of the surface of a cell so will continue to be a valid approach in
the foreseeable future to define cell–cell interactions and to discover
disease biomarkers and new therapeutic targets.

However, there may not be a need for de novo analysis of every single
oligosaccharide in the future. Matching of fragment spectra using
fragmentation libraries containing many of the more ubiquitously expressed
oligosaccharides ([Chapter 52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)) is becoming a pathway
to quickly assign a majority of structures fully or partially, and allows
researchers to focus on validation of only the differentiating structures that
are important for addressing the biological question. Novel mass fragmentation
techniques, the introduction of ion mobility [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/), and in vivo heavy isotopic incorporation are
starting to provide another dimension of separation for isomeric carbohydrates
and for the quantitation currently lacking in glycomics mass spectrometric
techniques.

A key question that often follows the identification of important
glycosylation features by glycomics is, which proteins carry the implicated
glycan structures and at which sites? Given that protein glycosylation is
dependent on the concerted action of glycosyltransferases, one might expect
all glycoproteins that pass through the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–Golgi
secretory pathway to be equally susceptible to similar modifications unless
one or more of the glycosyltransferases involved are protein site-specific.
Alternatively, a particular subset of proteins may share some common sequon,
structural conformation, a certain unique physicochemical patch surrounding
the glycosylation site, or some yet unknown traits that collectively allow
them to be sought out from among hundreds or thousands of other proteins to be
acted on by the glycosylation machinery in a specific way.

[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) site analysis by
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) of de-N-glycosylated
peptides is at present the prevalent mode of glycoproteomic analysis of a
complex protein sample, but this approach does not give information on what
glycan structure(s) are present on these defined glycosylation sites. By
virtue of the action of PNGase F or endo F/endo H, the de-N-glycosylated
peptides are mass-tagged by conversion of Asn to Asp (a +1 Da change in
peptide mass) within the consensus sequon ([Figure
51.2](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f2/?report=objectonly)) or by retention of
a GlcNAc at the Asn site, respectively. These previously glycosylated proteins
can then be subjected to trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis, and the
MS/MS data searched against proteomic databases for rapid identification of
the glycosylation sites on the tryptic peptide. This approach can be coupled
to initial affinity or chemical capture of the glycoproteome subset, by use of
lectins at the glycoprotein and/or digested glycopeptide level, or by
hydrazine capture of the oxidized glycans on the glycopeptide, followed by
PNGase F release of the captured peptide. In this manner, hundreds of
N-glycosylation sites can now be routinely identified and their relative
abundance quantified. Apart from not being able to inform the site-specific
glycoform structures, the most commonly criticized aspect of this approach is
false positives introduced by spontaneous deamidation of Asn to Asp, which is
independent of the action of the PNGase F.

An innovative approach using the zinc finger nuclease gene targeting technique
to impair O-glycosylation pathways by preventing extension of the O-GalNAc
core has led to the generation of the first so-called SimpleCell, in which all
mucin-type O-glycans synthesized carry only a single GalNAc or sialyl GalNAc.
This same approach applied to O-mannose initiated glycans resolved a long-
standing question concerning the apparent abundance of O-mannose glycans in
brain tissue although at the time only a few relatively low abundance proteins
had been determined to possess this modification. This approach has greatly
facilitated glycoproteomic analysis of experimentally defined O-glycosylation
sites, although the actual sites and attached O-glycan structures under more
natural and specific physiological states remain unknown.

Not every N _-_ linked sequon (NXT/S) will carry a glycan and each
glycosylated site will carry a heterogeneous collection of glycan structures.
[Glycoproteomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycoproteomics/) needs ideally
to be able to identify all glycoproteins in a sample down to the level of
which sites are occupied, and to quantify and characterize their respective
glycoforms at that site. The ultimate aim is to dynamically take snapshots of
the distribution of disparate glycans on each glycoprotein in a cell to infer
how site-specific glycosylation may promote or interfere with interactions,
signaling, and any close encounter. Ultimately, to understand the specific
biological roles of protein glycoforms, we will need to define the population
of each molecular species that arises from combinations of site-specific
oligosaccharide diversity at multiple sites.

At the time of writing, direct LC-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/)/MS analysis of a mixture of intact glycopeptides is
unable to be routinely performed in an automated fashion for unambiguous
glycopeptide identification such as is done in proteomics analysis of
unmodified peptides. For N-glycopeptides, CID, either on an ion trap or
quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) platform, or increasingly by higher-energy
collision dissociation (HCD) induces mostly glycosidic cleavages, giving rise
to highly abundant glycan oxonium ions in the low mass region, complemented by
successive neutral losses of glycosyl residues from the precursors down to a
single GlcNAc at the Asn ([Figure
51.4A](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f4/?report=objectonly)). In favorable
cases, this so-called Y1 ion (peptide backbone+GlcNAc) can be identified and
its _m_ / _z_ can be used to define the molecular mass of the peptide carrying
the glycan, whereas the fragmentation spectrum gives the composition of the
attached glycan. In the case of O-glycopeptides, the glycosyl residue attached
to the hydroxyl groups of Ser/Thr is usually detached by HCD, leaving behind
an intact peptide backbone. The molecular mass information alone, however, is
not sufficient to allow unambiguous peptide identification in a shotgun
analysis of enriched glycopeptides derived from a whole cell.

Two other [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) approaches
are aimed at achieving or enhancing fragmentation along the peptide backbone
as well as of the glycan. The first is to use electron transfer dissociation
([ETD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/electrontransferdissociationetd/))
fragmentation, with or without additional CID- or HCD-based activation. In
principle, ETD leads mostly to c- and z-type peptide bond cleavages along the
peptide backbone without inducing glycosidic cleavages ([Figure
51.4B](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f4/?report=objectonly)). The practical
problem is that a significant peptide cleavage ion series will only be
produced if the charge ( _z_ ) is high, whereas the overall _m_ / _z_ remains
low. It does not perform as well with doubly and triply charged
N-glycopeptides occurring at _m_ / _z_ of >1400, which constitutes a
substantial portion of a normal tryptic peptide digest. One way to address
this issue is to increase the charge state of the peptides by either chemical
derivatization, such as using a tandem mass tag (TMT), and/or by using a
different proteolytic enzyme such as LysC or GluC instead of trypsin to
generate larger peptides. Using higher supplemental activation energies
(particularly with HCD) and/or longer ETD activation times also may help. ETD
works reasonably well with O-glycopeptides, particularly those decorated with
only one or two glycosyl residues including O-GlcNAc, O-GalNAc (Tn), O-GalNAc-
Gal (T), O-Fuc, and O-Man. By retaining these glycosyl substituents, ETD
allows identification of their distribution over several closely placed
Ser/Thr residues in a way that is otherwise very difficult to achieve by CID
or HCD.

The second and arguably the preferred approach for N-glycopeptide
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) analysis is to increase
the intensity and number of peptide sequence informative _b_ and _y_ ions
produced by CID and to measure them at high mass accuracy ([Figure
51.4A](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f4/?report=objectonly)). Recent
generations of MS instruments equipped with HCD (beam-type CID, i.e., the
traditional type found in triple quads as opposed to ion traps) are
increasingly capable of meeting these challenges without compromising the
required speed and number of fragmentation spectra collected per run. With the
ion trap instruments, the Y1 ion preidentified in previous runs can
alternatively be isolated for further levels of fragmentation and analysis (MS
_n_ ) yielding additional information.

At this stage of true glycoproteomic analysis, expert manual interpretation is
required to assign the composition and site of attachment of the glycan.
Informatics is needed to facilitate this analysis but computational solutions
at present are usually not sufficient ([Chapter 52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)).
[Glycopeptide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycopeptide/)
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/)2 data can be used to
deduce glycan composition at each site but does not currently afford detailed
linkage and stereochemistry information. Diagnostic fragment ions can be
sometimes found confirming terminal epitopes such as a fucosylated Hex-HexNAc
or sialylated fucosylated Hex-HexNAc (Lewis x and sialyl Lewis x,
respectively) but these cannot be distinguished from Lewis a and sialyl Lewis
a. At this time, continued development of selective enrichment and/or pre-
separation of specific subsets of glycopeptides needs to be pursued, because
no single LC-MS _n_ method or instrument is sufficient to handle the full
dynamic range of the entire glycopeptide pool derived from a complete
glycoproteome. To limit the search space and enhance the detailed structural
knowledge of the glycans encountered in a given glycoproteome, parallel
glycome profiling can be performed. Such a “glycomics-assisted
glycoproteomics” approach ([Figure
51.2](/books/NBK453015/figure/ch51.f2/?report=objectonly)) can also be
complemented with quantitative proteome and deglycoproteome profiling (mapping
of formerly glycosylated peptides), which reduce the search space even further
and provide supporting evidence to pinpoint the mechanism(s) driving the
observed glycoproteome alterations. At this stage, for most of the available
glycopeptide identification software tools it is strongly advised that manual
validation of the glycopeptide assignments are still performed to generate
sufficient confidence in the reported identifications. Future further
development of these technical and bioinformatics tools will allow
glycoproteomics to potentially directly resolve the structural details of the
attached glycans; however, at this time glycomics remains an important and
often essential forerunner to detailed glycoproteomic analysis.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Carolyn R. Bertozzi and Ram Sasisekharan and appreciate helpful comments and
suggestions from Barbara Adamczyk, Jeremy Praissman, Oliver Pearce, and Anel
Lizcano.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.052

Previous chapters have described how glycans are not directly encoded by genes
and that they are biosynthetically and structurally complex. The identity of
each glycan in a biological sample must be identified using analytical methods
to determine these diverse structural features. As a consequence, research
aimed at understanding the biological roles and consequences of glycan
structures depends on the availability of databases that allow these
structures to be defined, archived, organized, searched, annotated, and linked
to other databases with related genomic and proteomic information. This
chapter describes the current status of collecting, organizing, and extending
data from existing user-entered glycan structure and function databases.

Informatics plays a critical role in virtually every aspect of modern biology.
Our ability to compile the genomes of diverse organisms makes it possible to
predict the sequences of the proteins made by these organisms. These sequences
are widely used as the basis to predict protein function and to enable
proteomic analyses. Proteomic studies in turn advance biological research by
providing experimental evidence that supports the expression of specific
proteins, in particular tissues or cell types ([Figure
52.1](/books/NBK453097/figure/ch52.f1/?report=objectonly)). The informatics
resources that support these endeavors are facilitated by the fact that genes
and the translated polypeptides (i.e., proteins) are typically linear
molecules whose sequences are readily specified as a series of characters.
These representations are easy to digitize and store and many powerful
informatics tools for comparing and classifying polypeptides have been
developed. In contrast, the development of informatics tools for glycobiology
is much more difficult for several reasons. Notably, glycans are not directly
encoded by genes. Rather, each sugar residue in a growing glycan is added by a
distinct enzyme (i.e., a glycosyltransferase [GT]) ([Chapter
6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). These reactions are tightly controlled by the
availability of the donor and acceptor substrates in the cellular compartment
containing the GT. In addition, the organization and function of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–Golgi biosynthetic pathway is sensitive to many
factors such as the metabolic or developmental stage of the cell, or its level
of nutrients ([Chapter 4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)) and leads to structures that
can be extremely complex ([Chapter 3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/)). Furthermore,
complex glycans are often highly branched and their structures cannot be
described as a simple linear sequence ([Chapter 3](/books/n/glyco3/ch3/)).

Because of this biosynthetic and structural complexity, it is not currently
possible to accurately predict the structures of the glycans that an organism
can produce or how these glycans are conjugated with other molecules, armed
only with knowledge of that organism's genome or proteome. Rather, the
identity of each glycan in a biological sample must be identified using
analytical methods ([Chapters 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/) and
[51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)) that are sufficiently sophisticated to detect and
discern the glycan's diverse structural features. Thus, research aimed at
understanding the biological roles and consequences of glycan structures
depends on the availability of databases that allow these structures to be
archived, organized, searched, and annotated. However, the complexity and
diversity of glycan structures make the development of these databases
challenging. Currently there is no way to accurately predict the entire
biological complement of glycan structures in Nature, and so different
approaches are being used to create comprehensive databases. Collecting,
organizing, and extending data from existing user-entered glycan structure
databases, curating the available literature on described structures, and
developing a “virtual” database by predicting possible structures based on the
described synthetic pathways, are all ways in which this challenge is
presently being addressed.

Interpreting glycan structural information in the context of diverse types of
biological and chemical information is an additional challenge. For example,
most glycans in animals are covalently linked to proteins or lipids. The
glycan moieties of a glycoprotein are linked to specific amino acids (usually
asparagine, serine, or threonine) ([Chapters 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and
[10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). Which sites are glycosylated and which
structures are present at a particular site often vary, depending on many
factors, including the type, developmental stage, and disease state of the
cell or tissue. Collection, storage, and retrieval of a description of each
protein's glycosylation is time-, tissue-, organism-, interaction-, and
disease-dependent and thus presents a major challenge to bioinformaticians
working in the glycosciences (glycoinformaticians) as it requires integration
of conceptually diverse information, which may be stored in several different
data repositories and represented in various formats. Several distinct digital
formats have been used by existing databases to describe glycan structures.
However, these formats have diverged to become quite distinct, making it
difficult to compare information from different databases. This situation
demands the establishment of standard digital formats to represent this
diverse information such that it can be retrieved, parsed, and manipulated by
computational and visualization tools, thus making it easier for the scientist
to comprehend this complex information. For glycoproteins, the structures of
both the glycan and the protein must be represented along with the
relationship between these two entities (e.g., the identity of the
glycosylation site and the fraction of the protein molecules that bear the
glycan in each physiological state). To make this information relevant, the
scientist often requires explicit information about the biological context
(e.g., tissue and disease state) corresponding to the specified glycosylation
or describing how the glycosylation changes when the tissue or cell is
perturbed. The glycoscience community is building on the Human
[Proteome](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/proteome/) Organization-Proteomics
Standards Initiative (HUPO-PSI) foundations to develop similar resources that
describe the information that should be included when reporting experimental
data, with digital data exchange formats to facilitate communication of
structural and biological information and controlled vocabularies that allow
the data that is exchanged to be unambiguously interpreted. For example, the
Minimum Information Required for A [Glycomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycomics/) Experiment (MIRAGE) initiative (see below) is modeled after
the well-established Minimum Information for A Proteomics Experiment (MIAPE)
initiative of HUPO-PSI. These standards are required for the emergence of
glycobiology as a mature discipline that is accessible to the scientific
community as a whole.

Databases that provide authoritative information about glycan and
glycoconjugate structures, and well-defined standards that allow this
information to be exchanged, are required as a foundation for computational
tools that give insight into the biological functions and consequences of
glycosylation. Many different types of digital tools are necessary, ranging
from basic visualization software to software that assists in the
interpretation and structural annotation of glycoanalytic data (e.g., mass
spectra), to algorithms that identify correlations between glycosylation and
other biological phenomena (e.g., gene expression, disease, cell
differentiation). A major challenge facing the glycoinformatician is the
representation of the information that is consumed and produced by these
software tools in ways that are conceptually accessible to scientists who do
not have an extensive background in glycobiology. Eventually all data needs to
be permanently housed at long-term government-funded sites such as the
[National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and the [European Bioinformatics
Institute (EBI)](http://www.ebi.ac.uk). Needless to say, glycoinformaticians
have their work cut out for them.

The Complex [Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/)
Structure Database (CCSD) (commonly referred to as CarbBank) was established
in the mid-1980s and was developed and maintained by the Complex Carbohydrate
Research Center of the University of Georgia (USA). The main design objective
of CCSD was to allow researchers to find publications in which specific
carbohydrate structures were reported. The need to develop CarbBank as an
international effort was clearly recognized and resulted in worldwide curation
teams responsible for specific classes of glycans that resulted in more than
30,000 entries into the database. During the 1990s, a Dutch group (led by Hans
Vliegenthart) assigned nuclear magnetic resonance
([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) spectra to
CCSD entries (SugaBase). This was the first attempt to create a carbohydrate
NMR database that complemented CCSD entries with proton and carbon chemical
shift values. Unfortunately, funding for CCSD was discontinued in 1997.
Several large projects have followed, among which was EUROCarbDB, but it
ceased operation in 2011. EUROCarbDB was a design study initiated to develop
an infrastructure for carbohydrate-related data (structure and function),
comparable to and cross-linked with the extensively used genomics and
proteomics data collections. The initiative seeded integrated tools for
streamlining European glycomics research through the development of databases,
bioinformatics standards, efficient analysis and search algorithms, and Web-
based software components.

During this period, the Australian company,
[Proteome](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/proteome/) Systems, provided
commercial access to mammalian N- and O-glycan structures and glycoprotein
data curated from the literature in GlycoSuiteDB. The last release of
GlycoSuiteDB comprised more than 3000 glycoprotein-derived glycan structure
entries and relevant metadata descriptors including taxonomy, disease, and
methods of determination. This effort to provide curated information at the
glycoprotein level now continues under the UniCarbKB initiative.

In 2001, the Consortium for Functional [Glycomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycomics/) (CFG) was established, under the support of the U.S. National
Institute of General Medical Sciences, with the objective to deepen the
understanding of the function of carbohydrate–protein interactions on the cell
surface and in cell–cell communication. The CFG generated diverse data sets
which were derived from (1) gene expression of glycosyltransferases and
glycan-binding proteins (GBPs), (2) phenotypic analysis of transgenic mice,
(3) mass spectrometric profiling of glycan structures isolated from cells and
tissues, and (4) screening glycan affinity of proteins using glycan arrays.

Multiple initiatives to organize various glycan-related information and
resources have been launched over the last couple of decades since CarbBank:
GLYCOSCIENCES.de, CFG, EUROCarbDB, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) GLYCAN, Bacterial [Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydrate/) Structure Database (BCSDB), Japan Consortium for
[Glycobiology](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycobiology/) and Glycotechnology
Database (JCGGDB), UniCarbKB, and GlycomeDB, among other established programs.
[Table 52.1](/books/NBK453097/table/CH52TB1/?report=objectonly) provides a
list of software tools that are currently available across the areas of
structure databases, ontologies and guidelines, analytical tools, glyco-
enzymes, glycan binding, and three-dimensional (3D)/modeling/nuclear magnetic
resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)).

An important question is, what constitutes a glycan structure database useful
to all biologists? Current databases are largely incomplete and have a
significant number of incorrect entries that have accumulated. Many errors are
due to a lack of sufficient curation.

GlycomeDB was an initiative (by Rene Ranzinger) to consolidate structures from
a number of established glycan structure databases and provide links to the
original sources. A challenge has been the maintenance of GlycomeDB, which
required continuous updates to the data whenever one of the original databases
is updated. GlyTouCan (see below) was recently established as a stable
repository of chemically valid glycan structures and associated accession
numbers that can be used by diverse glycobiology data systems and has replaced
GlycomeDB in this context. Structures stored in GlyTouCan are checked only for
representational and chemical consistency and not for biological relevance.
Thus, databases that leverage GlyTouCan structural representations still
require improved methods for establishing and validating the biological
context of these structures. It should be noted that, because of the reliance
on analytical structure determination, a limitation for a majority of
databases is the number of fully characterized entries (i.e., defined linkages
and anomeric configurations between monosaccharides). For example, less than
15,000 out of the 40,000 structures in the amalgamated GlycomeDB are fully
defined.

Another approach to establish a glycan structure database is to scour the
published scientific literature for information. In 2010, the content of
GlycoSuiteDB was migrated into the UniCarbKB database, which provides a series
of new user interfaces and functionalities and has been made accessible and
linked to protein data on the SIB (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics) ExPASy
proteomics server.

KEGG GLYCAN, part of KEGG, was originally developed to store glycan structural
data and related pathway information (KEGG PATHWAY), and similar to other
databases, contains glycan structures extracted from CarbBank and structures
curated from the literature. However, because of the limited amount of data at
the time, a tool was developed to generate a virtual N-glycan structure
database (UniCorn; <http://www.unicarbkb.org/unicorn>), facilitated by the
Resource for Informatics of Glycomes at Soka (RINGS) resource
[Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/) Pathway Predictor (GPP) tool.
This tool generates, on-the-fly, all potential glycan structures that can be
synthesized starting from a specific glycan structure and using a selection of
enzymes involved in N _-_ glycan biosynthesis with the known substrate
specificity information for each glyco-enzyme. All of the possible glycans
that could be synthesized can then be computationally generated to obtain a
library of N-glycans that could be theoretically found in a particular cell.
This approach is dependent on the currently available information on the
activity and specificities of the selected enzymes.

It should be noted that most of these described efforts are focused on
vertebrate oligosaccharides. The [Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydrate/) Structure Database (CSDB) is the leading curated platform
for bacterial, archaeal, plant, and fungal carbohydrates containing more than
160,000 compounds from 7700 organisms. CSDB provides structural,
bibliographic, taxonomic, [NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/), and other related information on
carbohydrate structures, curated from the literature.

Several other glycodatabases are dedicated to knowledge of proteins that are
either involved in the synthesis/degradation of glycans or in their
recognition. The [Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes (CAZy) database records carbohydrate-
related enzymes based on taxonomy and an internal classification scheme
relying on amino acid sequence profiles ([Chapter 8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)).
Since 1998, the number of glyco-enzyme families has continued to grow to reach
several hundreds. CAZy links to reference sequence databases as well as to
Protein Data Bank ([PDB](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/proteindatabankpdb/))
three-dimensional protein structures. [Lectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/lectin/) databases have also been developed over the years, although they
remain with low content, reflecting the technical challenges in collecting
information regarding these proteins (e.g., LectinDB and Lectin Frontier DB).

A critical component of glycoinformatics is the availability of standardized
approaches to connect remote databases. To address this problem a number of
international efforts are underway to establish standards for the presentation
of glycomics data to facilitate data comparison, exchange, and verification,
which in turn simplifies cross-linking across individual glycan databases.

The [Glycomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycomics/) Ontology (GlycO) was
the first ontology developed to provide standard terminologies for
representing experimentally verified glycan structures. Another effort,
GlycoRDF, is a proposed standard ontology for glycomics data using Resource
Description Framework (RDF) to provide consistent terminologies for
representing glycan sequences, related biological sources, publications, and
experimental data on the Semantic Web. GlycoRDF is now being used by several
glycomics database providers, to enable large-scale integration of diverse
data collections in the glycosciences.

The essential accurate interpretation of glycoanalytical data for glycan
structure determination requires well-documented metadata, including the
parameters used to acquire and process the raw data along with supporting
biological source information for the sample being analyzed. Since 2011, the
glycomics community has supported the MIRAGE initiative to develop guidelines
for researchers to report the qualitative and quantitative results obtained by
diverse types of glycomics analyses (e.g., chromatography, mass spectrometry,
and arrays).

The establishment of unique identifiers for each glycan structure is the first
step toward the collection and organization of structural data, and a glycan
structure repository of structure identifiers for all structures—from fully
defined to incompletely specified or purely hypothetical—is needed. These
unique identifiers provide the semantic foundation required for individuals or
databases to effectively communicate by recording the identifier of the
structures they have characterized. A glycan registry allows precise
specification of the structural features that support the data, and unique
identifiers can be assigned to each partly or fully defined structure. This
registry facilitates the interpretation of results in the context of
structural and biological information that is available from other sources.
Nevertheless, a comparison of incompletely defined structures in terms of
sequence, linkage, and anomericity remains an ongoing challenge for
glycoinformaticians.

The development of such a repository (GlyTouCan) has begun, promising to
provide both developers and researchers with a platform for assigning glycan
structures that will connect experimental and curated databases. This
repository is a freely available, uncurated registry for glycan structures
that assigns globally unique accession numbers to any structure entry.
Registered users can submit any glycan structure whether they are fully
defined, contain ambiguous linkages, or are simply monosaccharide
compositions, independent of experimental evidence. GlyTouCan uses the
GlycoRDF ontology to represent the registered data such that other data
resources also using this ontology can be integrated and queried by glycan
structure. Different information resources (e.g., databases and publications)
can reference these identifiers, thus facilitating identification and
interpretation of diverse but complementary data sets that embody information
about specific glycan structures.

Many advances in glyco-related databases and informatics tools development
have focused on the interpretation and storage of analytical data, including
liquid chromatography, capillary electrophoresis, interaction arrays, mass
spectrometry ([MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/)), and
[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/).

Most efforts so far have focused on tools that assist the interpretation of
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) data. A number of
commercial and publicly accessible software are now available. Introduced in
1999, the widely used GlycoMod was the first glycoinformatics Web-based tool
to be released in this context, and its function is to suggest possible glycan
compositions from experimental mass values of either free or derivatized
glycans or glycopeptides. The Glycosciences.de portal started a toolset for
analyzing and interpreting experimental data, and a decade later, the
EUROCarbDB initiative launched GlycoWorkbench as a freely downloadable
software tool to assist the interpretation of MS/MS data by matching a
theoretical list of fragment masses against the experimental peak list derived
from the mass spectrum. This tool has been integrated into several glycan
resources as it provides an easy-to-use interface, a comprehensive collection
of fragmentation types, and a list of annotation options. UniCarb-DB adopts
the approach of storing annotated and curated experimental MS/MS data against
which spectral matching can be used to identify unknown structures. RINGS
provides Web-based software ([Glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycan/)
Miner Tool, ProfilePSTMM) to analyze distinguishable glycan fragments from
glycan profiling (MS) data, and the GlycomeAtlas tool in RINGS is a
visualization tool for glycan profiling data in mouse and human, where the
distribution of glycans across various tissues is visualized.

The GRITS toolbox is also a freely available integrated environment for
processing glycoanalytic data. It uses a plug-in approach to facilitate reuse
and integration of data-processing modules. Currently, GRITS includes modules
for collecting, annotating, and comparing mass spectral data, manipulating the
corresponding metadata, and generating reports.

A major component of GlycoWorkBench is GlycanBuilder, a tool that allows for
the drawing of glycan structures. GlycanBuilder can be used stand-alone,
embedded in webpages, and can also be integrated into other programs.
Recently, an updated version of the tool was included in the UniCarbKB and
GlyTouCan databases providing an intuitive method for searching structural
content. In-built features provide support for the conversion of various
glycan display and formats allowing users to efficiently switch between
Essentials/CFG, Oxford, hybrid, and International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC) symbol formats while supporting different text formats:
LinearCode(r), KCF (KEGG Chemical Function), GlycoCT, GLYDE-II, Oxford, and
LINUCS. A universal symbol nomenclature for the graphical representation of
glycan structures (Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans [SNFG], see [Online
Appendix 1B](/books/n/glyco3/symbolnomenclature/)) has been proposed to
facilitate the standardization of how glycans are visually depicted, and is
used throughout this book. [Online Appendix
52A](/books/n/glyco3/app_snfg_adopt/) lists current databases and journal
publishers that have thus far accepted or strongly recommend the use of this
nomenclature.

A more recent advancement in glycosciences is the field of glycoproteomics, in
which glycoproteins and glycopeptides are analyzed in their native form, with
glycans attached to them, using [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/massspectrometryms/) techniques ([Figure
52.1](/books/NBK453097/figure/ch52.f1/?report=objectonly); [Chapter
51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)). [Glycoproteomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycoproteomics/) not only allows the identification of the glycoprotein
and the attached glycans, but also preserves the microheterogeneity
information on the glycan structures. Different fragmentation methods
(electron transfer dissociation [[ETD](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/electrontransferdissociationetd/)], collision-induced dissociation [CID],
and higher-energy collision dissociation [HCD]) each provide distinct
information about the different structural features of glycoproteins. Mass
spectrum matching algorithms use a wide range of strategies (e.g., database
search, de novo sequencing, or spectral library matching) to identify specific
spectral fragment masses and thereby assign glycopeptide structural features.
Following the ability now to obtain large data sets on glycopeptides generated
from complex mixtures of glycoproteins ([Chapter 51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)),
a bottleneck that has severely limited the field of glycoproteomics is the
downstream glycopeptide structural identification. The identification process
was, until recently, largely driven by manual expert annotation of the
resulting MS/MS spectra. However, many glycoinformatics initiatives are under
continuing development to automate this glycopeptide identification process
using various strategies to identify intact glycopeptides by using
characteristic fragment ions. A few software tools are freely available to
address the challenge of analyzing glycoproteomics data, such as GlycoMaster
DB, Sweet-Heart, GlyPID, GP Finder, and GPQuest, and recent commercial and
open-source software developments include Byonic, Protein Prospector, and
Skyline that allow semiautomated identification of N- and O-glycopeptides from
high-resolution MS/MS data.

In comparison to [MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/), few
software tools are available for supporting (ultra)high-performance liquid
chromatography (U/[HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/)) data analysis and storage.
GlycoBase is a Web-enabled proprietary resource that contains normalized
chromatographic retention data, expressed as glucose units, for more than 700
fluorescently labeled (2-AB) N-linked and O _-_ linked glycan structures.
These values were obtained by systematic analysis of released glycans from a
diverse set of mammalian glycoproteins. GlycoBase is supported by a selection
of data analysis tools, notably autoGU, which can be used to assign putative
glycan structures to each U/HPLC peak, and when used in combination with
exoglycosidases creates a digest footprint—that is, using shifts in GU values
due to cleavage of terminal monosaccharides to accurately identify and
quantitatively analyze a glycan mixture ([Chapter 51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)).
This approach has now been commercialized.

[NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/) data was
obtained on carbohydrate structures in the 1980s and 1990s and is still the
best analytical technique available to obtain complete structural information
on purified oligosaccharides but is less used now because of the difficulty in
obtaining sufficient material from biological sources. The CASPER (Computer
Assisted Spectrum Evaluation of Regular Polysaccharides) program predicts 1H-
and 13C-NMR chemical shifts of glycans. As such, it is used for determining
the glycan structures based on experimental NMR data.

Another area of software analysis of experimental data has been in mining
glycan array data sets to identify glycan sequence motifs recognized by
various GBPs, such as plant and animal lectins, viral and bacterial pathogen
proteins, and antibodies. GlycoPattern is a Web-based platform that was
developed to support the analysis of CFG glycan array data. It offers a
variety of algorithms and tools to mine array data to discover structural
binding motifs of GBPs. Such data analysis determines the relative binding
strength/specificity of a GBP to a glycan motif or determinant on the array.
SugarBind is a curated database that combines this information with
literature-derived knowledge of pathogen–glycan binding. RINGS also has
analytical tools for predicting glycan-binding patterns from glycan array
data.

Because of their inherent flexibility, oligosaccharides typically exist in
solution, or on proteins, as an ensemble of conformations, making it a
challenge to describe their 3D structure. Computational chemistry is an
essential tool in analyzing glycan experimental data, to make predictions that
may be tested experimentally and to unravel and explain chemical processes at
the atomic level.

Freely available Web-based tools are available to generate a theoretical model
of a carbohydrate 3D structure. A useful resource is GLYCAM-Web that provides
tools for modeling oligosaccharides and glycoproteins in addition to providing
downloadable structure files that can be used for molecular modeling. SWEET-II
is also a carbohydrate 3D builder that is available on the GLYCO SCIENCES.de
website.

The two major databases for storing experimentally determined 3D carbohydrate
structures are the [PDB](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/proteindatabankpdb/) and
the Cambridge Structural Database. Crystal structures of oligosaccharides and
lectins are also available at Glyco3D. Most of the carbohydrates in the PDB
are either connected covalently to a glycoprotein, or form a complex with a
lectin, enzyme, or antibody. However, because of the absence of sophisticated
tools to experimentally determine the 3D shape of glycans and for checking the
accuracy of their atomic coordinates in structural data files, it must be
noted that PDB does not contain accurate information about carbohydrate
stereochemistry, possibly leading to incorrect glycan structure assignments.
Statistical analysis of the carbohydrates present in the PDB entries can be
performed with tools such as GlyVicinity, and validation/checking of certain
glycan structures can be performed with PDB-Care.

Despite the known sequon (NXT/S) for N-linked glycosylation, many potential
sites are not glycosylated in vivo, and there are no clear motif(s) for
predicting O-linked glycosylation. Understanding the “rules” of attachment
site specificity for the glycosylation of proteins is thus an ongoing
challenge for glycoinformaticians. Over the past 20 years neural networks,
hidden Markov models (HMMs), and support vector machines (SVMs) have been
implemented to predict N- or O-glycosylation and C-mannosylation. Most of
these tools are hosted on the Danish CBS Prediction Servers. For
[O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/) sites, a
specific SVM-based tool is integrated in dbOGAP where O-GlcNAcylated proteins
are collected and curated.

There is tremendous value in integrating genomics, transcriptomics, and
proteomics data with glycomics to gain a holistic understanding of a
biological process ([Figure
52.1](/books/NBK453097/figure/ch52.f1/?report=objectonly)). This means that
glycomics data needs to be viewed in the context of complementary gene,
protein, and lipid data to gain a systems-level understanding of a process.

The Japan Consortium for [Glycobiology](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycobiology/) and Glycotechnology Database (JCGGDB) is a database of
glycoscience data accumulated in Japan. It includes an integrated search
function for eight databases accessible from JCGGDB. A high-quality resource
of JCGGDB is the provision of all experimentally verified glyco-genes in
humans, with each record annotated with literature references and provided
with a graphical view of substrate specificity. Much of the data has been
accumulated from the experimental data obtained at the National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, which houses JCGGDB. These include
[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/) data, lectin affinity
data, glycoprotein data, and glyco-gene information. In KEGG GLYCAN, various
tools have been added to interface glycomics data with genomic/transcriptomics
information with a composite structure map summarizing the structures in the
database and their relationships. Moreover, glyco-related genes (e.g.,
glycosyltransferases and GBPs) have been organized in KEGG BRITE in terms of
the KEGG orthology (KO). Thus, genomic and functional analysis of glyco-
related genes and glycan structures can be performed using the KEGG resources.

UniCarbKB also aims to integrate complementary -omics data to provide a
knowledgebase for glycomics information. UniCarbKB provides contextual
information for the glycan structures in the database as attached to proteins,
and where known, shows the connection between a specific glycan structure and
the attached proteins as annotated in the proteomics knowledgebase UniProtKB.
The coverage and content of UniCarbKB depends on efforts to curate current
literature that contain characterized glycan structures and their sites of
attachment to proteins, with supporting data on experimental conditions and
biological sources.

This integration of complex molecular data from all types of analytical
techniques and interactions is in its infancy, but is essential for the
continued progress of glycobiological research.

Web services are a common technology that enables programmers to write
computer programs that can access data via the Web. Data providers write
application programming interfaces (APIs) to allow other programmers to access
their data. The advantage of Web services is that it provides more flexibility
to bioinformaticians, in particular, to access data. Web services can also be
used within other webpages to automatically obtain search results (e.g., for a
particular query sent via the Web service). Data providers can also control
the data that can be accessed and the kinds of queries that can be made by
providing web service APIs, thus assuring some level of security in terms of
database access.

In contrast to Web services, the Semantic Web is a new technology that
provides a framework for making data available directly on the Internet,
provided with semantics, such that inferences can be made automatically based
on the data. For example, a researcher often refers to various publications to
come up with a new hypothesis to test. Using the Semantic Web, the data in the
publications would be formatted in such a way (using predefined vocabulary, or
ontologies) such that the meaning behind the data is preserved in a computable
form. Because a common vocabulary, or ontology, would be used across different
publications in different websites (i.e., journals), the terminology used to
encapsulate the semantics is preserved. With such data available on the
Semantic Web, machine learning technologies allow computers to make inferences
based on the data available, just as a researcher would think of new
hypotheses.

The Semantic Web is based on the RDF that defines data as _triples,_
consisting of a subject, predicate, and object, such that semantics can be
incorporated into the data. Thus, it is important that ontologies are defined
and standardized such that data providers use common terminology to define
their RDF data. The BioPortal is a major resource of ontologies for the life
sciences, within which GlycoRDF, GlycO, and other glycomics ontologies are
centrally stored. As more ontologies are developed by the community, and as
more life science database developers use RDF, the Semantic Web will become a
powerful tool to integrate the glycosciences with other life science fields,
including genomics, proteomics, and lipidomics.

Systems biology involves the development, simulation, and analysis of
biological systems (including whole-body and environmental systems) at the
molecular and cellular levels. As research on glycan biosynthetic pathway
simulation progresses, its integration with protein-level systems biology will
allow for a better understanding of glycosylation processes and interactions
with GBPs.

The current coordinated trend toward RDF-based data integration is already
shaping future developments of glycoscience databases. It will help bridge the
gap between glycomics and other -omics that have already adopted RDF
ontologies but that are still very much DNA sequence-centered. Indeed, 30
years after the advent of sequencing technology, DNA sequences, along with
their links to other data types (gene expression, protein structure, etc.),
remain the most prominent entities in molecular biology databases and
repositories. Scientists gather sequence-centered information in the course of
elucidating a cellular process or a pathological behavior, simply because a
gene/protein sequence is usually the common element shared across -omics
domains. The problem here is that glycans are only linked to the gene via
their biosynthetic enzymes and substrates. The advancement of glycoscience as
a discipline depends on expanding the integration of data describing
glycoproteins, glycolipids, glycosaminoglycans, lipopolysaccharides, and the
genome-coded enzymatic machinery that generates or breaks down these glycans,
together with the ever increasing information about the interactions of these
glycoconjugates with other components of the cell.

It is the ultimate goal of glycoscience research to be able to link glycan
structures with their function. Although it is still difficult to completely
identify fully defined glycan structures in a high-throughput manner, various
hypotheses regarding the relationships between the specific structure of a
glycan and its biological functions have been developed. One hypothesis
maintains that the structural features characteristic of a group of glycans,
rather than of a single structure, are required for biological function. This
hypothesis is probable but is unlikely to be valid in all cases, as many
discrete glycans are known to have quite specific functions, and changing a
single monosaccharide or glycosidic conformation can greatly affect their
capacity to realize their functions. Thus, additional work is required to
accumulate as much of the experimental glycomics data as possible into
standardized formats, such that comprehensive, integrated analyses can be
performed using bioinformatics technologies.

The future of current endeavors in glyco-related informatics lies in the
consolidation of international consortia. The small size of the glycoscience
community has prompted several cooperative initiatives across all continents
for representing and collecting glycomics data (as described above). To favor
interactions between these complementary initiatives, the international
[Glycome](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycome/) Informatics Consortium (GLIC)
has been founded in 2015 to provide and maintain a centralized software
resource enabling cooperative database and tool development. Also in 2015, a
[Glycomics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycomics/) section was established
on the SIB ExPASy proteomics resource portal, and glycoprotein entries in
UniProtKB were linked to glycan structural information where known in
UniCarbKB. In addition, the National Institutes of Health, USA as part of the
Common Fund Glycoscience Program is now focused on creating new methodologies
and resources to study glycans that include the development of data
integration and analysis tools.

These international efforts are affirmation that the importance of
bioinformatics resources for glycoscience is finally being recognized, such
that the role of glycans may be more easily understood and accessed by the
broader research community. But it is clear that there is a long way to go
before the entire community can have routine access to what aficionados of
nucleic acid and protein biology currently take for granted: reliable, well-
curated, user-friendly, cross-referenced databases that are permanently and
safely housed in major long-term government-funded central servers.
Achievement of this goal will be critical to bringing the study of glycans
into the mainstream of evolutionary, molecular and cellular biology, and its
applications to medicine, materials science, and other fields that benefit
humankind.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Ram Sasisekharan and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Shadi
Toghi Eshghi, Morten Thaysen-Andersen, and David B. Nix.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.053

Pure glycans of defined structure are essential research tools in
glycobiology. Unlike proteins and nucleic acids, which can be obtained in
homogeneous forms by recombinant expression and polymerase chain reaction
([PCR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/polymerasechainreactionpcr/)),
respectively, glycans produced in biological systems are heterogeneous.
Furthermore, the quantities that can be obtained from biological systems are
often small. Chemical synthesis can be used to obtain homogeneous glycans in
larger quantities than are available from most cellular production systems.
Chemical synthesis can be further used to incorporate glycans into homogeneous
glycoproteins. This chapter summarizes the current state of the art in
chemical methods to produce glycans. Enzymes can be used together with
chemical methods to further simplify the process of glycan synthesis ([Chapter
54](/books/n/glyco3/ch54/)).

The inherent chemical properties of oligosaccharides render their synthesis
more complicated than the synthesis of the other major classes of
biomolecules: oligonucleotides and oligopeptides. Fundamental challenges of
glycan synthesis are required for modifying one specific hydroxyl group in the
presence of many others and for control over the stereochemical outcome in the
creation of an interglycosidic linkage. Commonly, glycan synthesis is
characterized by the manipulation of various protecting groups, chemical
moieties that mask the hydroxyl groups and prevent them from reacting with
other chemical reagents. Hydroxyl-protecting groups are selectively added and
removed from glycan structures, allowing for chemical alteration of the
exposed hydroxyl groups. Subsequently, in a typical glycan synthesis scheme,
the exposed hydroxyl group serves as a point for further elaboration. The
selective exposure of one hydroxyl group allows for regioselective addition of
another (mono)saccharide unit. Synthetic schemes of this type are commonly
applied to the generation of O- and N-linked glycans ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/) and [10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) as well as
proteoglycans ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)) and glycosphingolipids
([Chapter 11](/books/n/glyco3/ch11/)).

The choice of protecting groups and the order of protecting group installation
are essential for a synthesis route to be successful. The most common
protecting groups include persistent protecting groups, such as benzyl ethers
that stay in place through many synthetic steps, and temporary protecting
groups, such as carbonates or esters that are removed during intermediate
steps in a synthesis. A wealth of information exists on the chemical
generation of glycans and various protecting group manipulations used in the
context of glycan synthesis.

A glycosidic linkage is generally formed through the activation of a
glycosylating agent (glycosyl acceptor) to create an electrophilic species
that reacts with the nucleophile—for example, a hydroxyl group present on the
glycosyl acceptor or another class of biomolecule (serine/threonine in the
case of glycopeptides or a sphingoid in the case of glycosphingolipids). The
glycosylation reaction results in either the formation of an α- or
β-glycosidic linkage ([Chapter 2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)). A major challenge in
glycan synthesis is the stereoselective formation of glycosidic bonds ([Figure
53.1A](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f1/?report=objectonly); [Chapter
2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)). A variety of methods are available to
stereoselectively generate glycosidic linkages. The yield and the
stereochemical outcome of these reactions depend on the steric and electronic
nature of the glycosylating agent (the glycosyl donor), the nature of the
nucleophile, and the reaction conditions chosen. One common method to control
the stereochemistry at the anomeric center involves the use of certain
protecting groups, such as esters or amides/carbamates, on the C-2-hydroxyl or
C-2-amino group ([Figure
53.1B](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f1/?report=objectonly)). These
“participating neighboring protecting groups” can form a cyclic oxonium ion
intermediate during the glycosylation reaction, that shields one face of the
molecule, leading exclusively to the formation of a “ _trans_ ” glycosidic
linkage (i.e., where the anomeric substituent and the C-2 group are on
opposite sides of the ring, as in β-glucosides). The opposite anomeric
stereochemistry, termed a “ _cis_ ” glycosidic bond, is more difficult to
construct with high selectivity, and neighboring group participation—with
exceptions—is not possible. Many different synthetic procedures have been
developed for the reliable stereoselective construction of _cis_ -glycosidic
linkages and linkages involving C-2-deoxy sugars. Although not as general as
protecting group participation in the synthesis of _trans_ -glycosidic
linkages, insight into mechanisms of chemical glycosylation reactions
continues to grow allowing for the stereocontrolled introduction of an
increasing number of _cis_ \- and 2-deoxy glycosidic linkages.

Carbohydrates are endowed with a wealth of functional groups. This complicates
glycan synthesis, and considerable time and efforts are devoted to the
development of suitable protective group schemes that allow the protection and
deprotection of individual functional groups at will.
[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/) functional groups
include hydroxyls, amines, and carboxylates, and distinguishing between these
is relatively easy. Selective modification of hydroxyls—the most abundant
functional groups in carbohydrates—is somewhat more complicated. Primary
hydroxyls and anomeric hydroxyls are relatively easy to manipulate
specifically, the former for steric reasons and the latter because they are
part of a hemiacetal or hemiketal. Specific access to secondary hydroxyls
requires chemistry tailored to capitalize on, for instance, their
configuration ( _cis_ -hydroxyls versus _trans_ -hydroxyls, equatorial versus
axial) and their relative reactivity (i.e., exploiting steric and/or
electronic differences). A representative protective group scheme starting
from S-tolylglucopyranose (the S-tolyl group serves as both a masking group of
the anomeric hydroxyl and as leaving group in glycosylation schemes) is
depicted in [Figure 53.2](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f2/?report=objectonly).
In the first step all hydroxyls are transformed into the corresponding
trimethylsilyl ethers—this to render the polar carbohydrate soluble in organic
solvents. Next and in a series of complementary functional group
manipulations, either O-2 (A), O-4 (B), or O-6 (C) is selectively liberated.
In all instances, the first step comprises creation of the 4,6-O-benzilydene
species. Reductive benzylation of O-3 followed by benzoylation of O-2 and
reductive opening of the benzylidene toward the O-4-benzyl delivers glucose
building block C. Alternative reductive opening of the benzylidene toward the
O-6-benzyl delivers B, whereas leaving the benzylidene intact and removal of
any remaining silyl protective groups delivers glucoside A.

In the synthesis of a fragment of a putative repeating unit of the
exopolysaccharide of _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_ ([Figure
53.3](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f3/?report=objectonly)), the interplay
between protective group pattern and glycosylation strategies becomes
apparent. [Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) of
4,6-O-benzylidene protected thiomannoside **1** with orthogonally protected
fucoside **2** under the agency of benzenesulfinylpiperidine (BSP) and triflic
anhydride (Tf2O) affords disaccharide **2**. The stereoselective creation of
the β-mannosidic linkage is explained by suppression of oxocarbenium ion
formation due to torsional strain induced by the benzylidene moiety. Instead,
SN2 displacement of an intermediate anomeric α-triflate provides the 1,2-
_cis_ β-mannoside species.

Oxidative removal of the naphthyl (Nap) protective group and treatment with
mannoside **4** gives trisaccharide **5**. The anomeric allyl (All) group on
the reducing fucoside is removed and transformed into the glycosyl
trichloroacetimidate, which is condensed with the 3-hydroxyl group of
orthogonally protected glucoside **6** to give tetrasaccharide **7**. A
2-O-benzoyl (Bz) participating group in fucose building block **2** ensures
the 1,2- _trans_ -configuration. Elaboration of tetrasaccharide **7** led to
fully protected decasaccharide **10** and illustrates the need for the two
differently protected building blocks **1** and **4**. The benzyl (Bn)
protective group in **1** serves as a permanent protective group destined for
removal at the final stages of the synthesis. The tertbutyldimethylsilyl (TBS)
group in **4** in contrast can be removed selectively during the synthesis.
The 2-hydroxyl groups in mannose residues are liberated and 1,2- _trans_ (α)
mannosylated with building block **8**. Global deprotection of **9** is
effected in two steps: first, base treatment to remove acyl protective groups,
which is followed by catalytic hydrogenation to simultaneously remove benzyl,
naphthyl, and benzylidene groups. The azide at the reducing end spacer is
transformed into the amine for neoglycoprotein synthesis for immunization
studies, or to produce glycan arrays.

Automated solid-phase synthesis has made a great impact on peptide/protein and
nucleic acid chemistry and biology. This development in synthetic chemistry
made peptides and oligonucleotides available to biologists and facilitated
studies of their structures and functions. Likewise, the availability of a
general automated (solid-phase) method for glycan synthesis would vastly
accelerate access to homogeneous material for biological studies. Because
oligosaccharide synthesis is much more complex than the assembly of
oligopeptides and nucleotides, automated procedures for glycan assembly have
been slower to evolve, but automated synthesizers are now commercially
available. A prerequisite in automated glycan assembly is full control over
the stereochemistry of a newly formed glycosidic linkage. Once suitable
orthogonal protective groups and linker systems are defined, a solid-phase
synthesis campaign is feasible. An important added value of solid-phase glycan
assembly is the ability to rapidly generate libraries of related but distinct
glycans, and the ability to elaborate fragments of a size not normally
(because of aggregation) feasible in solution. Solid-phase synthesis allows
for a large excess of the building blocks and activating agents to be used.
Unreacted intermediates can be capped to avoid the accumulation of deletion
sequences.

The synthesis of a library of plant cell wall arabinoxylans ([Figure
53.4A](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f4/?report=objectonly)) commences with
charging tailor-made photocleavable linker **11** with orthogonally protected
xylose **12** equipped with an anomeric phosphotriester as the leaving group.
After triethylamine (Et3N)-induced removal of the fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl
(Fmoc) group the immobilized monoxylose is elongated with another copy of
**12** and next (after Fmoc removal) with xylose derivative **13** , featuring
a 3-O-naphthyl (Nap) protective group. The Nap can be selectively removed
under oxidative (DDQ) conditions after which L-arabinofuranose derivative
**14** can be used in the next glycosylation cycle.

The sequence of events outlined in [Figure
53.4A](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f4/?report=objectonly) can be readily
adapted to produce larger xylan oligomer structures, or to install
L-arabinofuranose moieties at different positions. In case coupling steps
proceed inefficiently and truncated oligomers threaten to emerge, a capping
step (with acetic anhydride and pyridine) can be programmed into the automated
solid-phase glycan synthesizer to ensure facile separation of the full-length
products from truncations. Once assembly is complete the oligomers are
liberated from the solid support by exposure to 305 nm photons after which
acyl protective groups are methanolized and benzyl/Nap groups are
hydrogenolyzed. In this final step also the N-carboxybenzyl group that emerges
upon photolytic cleavage is removed to yield an amine group at the reducing
end sugar for bioconjugation purposes.

The synthesis of an alginate dodecamer composed of the β1-4-mannuronate
moieties is of note because it required the repetitive installation of _cis_
-glycosidic linkages. The synthesis makes use of immobilized allyl alcohol
**15**. Reaction with donor mannuronic ester **16** under catalytic amounts of
TfOH (trifluoromethanesulfonic acid) yields immobilized monosaccharide **17**.
Removal of the levulinoyl (Lev) group at O-4 is accomplished by treatment with
hydrazine (H2N-NH2) monoacetate, after which the coupling-deprotection
sequence is repeated for the desired number of times. Upon completion of the
glycan assembly the fully protected oligosaccharide is removed from the solid
support by cross metathesis and subsequent removal of all protective groups by
treatment with strong base and hydrogenolysis.

Significant progress in understanding the glycosylation mechanism (required to
develop more effective and selective glycosylation procedures) has been made
over the years by the application of computational methods. For example,
density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been used to determine
plausible transition states to explain high 1,2- _cis_ -selectivity observed
in reactions using 4,6-benzylidene mannosyl donors (as exemplified in [Figure
53.3](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f3/?report=objectonly)). These studies have
revealed that the formation of the β-linked mannosides originate from an
SN2-type displacement of the anomeric mannosyl α-triflate, where (the
nondesired) α-linked products are formed. Computational methods guided the
design of a 3,5-silylidene ketal to conformationally lock the arabinofuranose
ring in an E3 envelope structure for selective _cis_ -glycosylation reactions
[Figure 53.5](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f5/?report=objectonly). Selective
attack of the envelope by the incoming nucleophile from the bottom (B)-face
generates the 1,2- _cis_ arabinofuranosyl linkage of a plant arabinogalactan
fragment ([Figure 53.5](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f5/?report=objectonly)).

A database has been used to design effective one-pot glycosylation sequences.
Wong and coworkers determined the relative reactivity values (RRVs, a number
indicating how reactive a glycosyl donor is) of hundreds of thioglycoside
donors. This reactivity scale (spanning more than eight orders of magnitude)
can be used to design one-pot oligosaccharide assembly strategies, in which
several thioglycosides are combined and selective activation of one of the
building blocks over the others can be achieved. A computer program, Optimer,
aids the selection of the most effective combination of building blocks,
equipped with the proper set of protecting groups that tune the reactivity.
[Figure 53.6](/books/NBK453069/figure/ch53.f6/?report=objectonly) shows the
one-pot assembly of the tumor-associated N3 antigen octasaccharide using the
Optimer approach. Three building blocks with optimal RRVs were designed and
synthesized: fucosyl donor **28** (RRV = 7.2 × 104), lactosamine donor **29**
(RRV = 41) and lactose building block **30** (RRV = 0). Assembly of the latter
disaccharides was also performed using chemoselective glycosylations by
exploiting RRVs. Combination of the first two building blocks in a
BSP/Tf2O-mediated condensation gave the trisaccharide thioglycoside. The
addition of lactose **30** to the reaction vessel and NIS/TfOH to promote the
ensuing double glycosylation provided the octasaccharide **31**. After
deprotection the spacer functionalized octasaccharide **32** was obtained in
11% yield.

Over the past two decades, the chemical synthesis of glycans has advanced from
an art practiced by synthetic chemists who engaged in heroic total synthesis
efforts, to a more and more routine task for glycans that contain common
monomeric constituents and _trans_ -glycosidic linkages. With the
commercialization of automated glycan assembly in which a set of common
building blocks is combined on a solid-phase resin, the synthesis process can
be greatly accelerated. Polysaccharides as long as 50-mers, as well as
glycosaminoglycans, are now rapidly accessible in multimilligram quantities.
The production of longer sequences and highly branched structures will become
routine in the coming years. Automated synthesis is expected to become an
important part of carbohydrate synthesis in the years to come. Still, for
challenging targets, containing rare monosaccharides, sialic acids, and
2-deoxy and 1,2- _cis_ -linkages, improved methods for solution phase
synthesis will have to be developed. These methods will greatly benefit from
the advances in fundamental knowledge on the glycosylation reaction and will
be aided by knowledge gathered in databases. In addition, enzymatic synthesis
and combinations of chemical and enzymatic synthesis will become more and more
important assets to procure larger glycans with more challenging sequences.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Carolyn Bertozzi, Nathaniel Finney, and David Rabuka and appreciate helpful
comments and suggestions from Yuta Maki, Keisuke Mizote, and Ryan Porell.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.054

Glycosyltransferases are the biosynthetic enzymes responsible for the
construction of interglycosidic linkages, and glycosidases catalyze the
opposite reaction, hydrolysis of interglycosidic linkages ([Chapter
6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). The diversity of natural glycans is reflected by
the numerous glycosyltransferases and glycosidases encountered in nature, each
showing a defined substrate specificity. Natural glycans are often encountered
in heterogeneous form and often produced in minute amounts, making their
isolation and characterization from natural sources often cumbersome.
Therefore, glycobiology relies heavily on synthetic glycans, and synthetic
methodology to produce glycans has witnessed tremendous progress in the past
two decades ([Chapter 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/)). Glycosyltransferases and
glycosidases offer several advantages in the construction of glycans.
Especially under controlled conditions, these biocatalysts are very powerful.
Here, recent developments in the use of (mutant) glycosidases and
glycosyltransferases for the synthesis of tailored glycans, including
combinations of both enzyme classes and in conjunction with synthetic
intermediates, are presented.

Biological evolution has spent millions of years optimizing enzymatic
processing for the biosynthesis and cleavage of specific glycans with highly
specific glycosidic linkages. Thus, it is logical to turn to naturally
occurring glycosyltransferases and glycosidases to address some difficult
problems in synthesis of glycans in vitro. The mechanism of action of
glycosyltransferases even resembles the way an interglycosidic linkage is
installed by chemical synthesis ([Chapter 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/)). An
activated donor saccharide, represented by UDP-glucose ([Figure
54.1](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f1/?report=objectonly)), is condensed with
an acceptor moiety (here, ceramide) to give, after expulsion of the leaving
group (here, UDP), the glycoconjugate (glucosylceramide). In contrast to
chemical synthesis, the regioselectivity is regulated by the enzyme active
site that also selects for donor- and acceptor-glycosides. Glucosylceramide
synthase (GCS) catalyzed synthesis of glucosylceramide ([Figure
54.1](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f1/?report=objectonly)) proceeds with
_inversion_ of the anomeric configuration, with the α-glucosidic linkage in
UDP-glucose transformed into the β-glucosidic linkage in glucosylceramide.
Nature uses a limited set of donor glycosides—most prominently the _Leloir_
donor glycosides, next to UDP-glucose (e.g., CMP-sialic acid, GDP-mannose)—and
the nature of the glycosyltransferase determines whether glycosylation
proceeds with _retention_ or _inversion_ of configuration at the anomeric
center ([Chapter 6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). The mechanisms used by
glycosyltransferases are not resolved yet and are the subject of intense
research.

Glucosylceramide is hydrolyzed by the lysosomal exo-glucosidase, acid
glucosylceramidase (GBA). Hydrolysis takes place with _retention of
configuration_ and is the result of a double displacement mechanism. Upon
protonation of the aglycon, ceramide is displaced in a formal SN2 substitution
to yield a covalent enzyme-glycoside adduct. On entry of water in the enzyme
active site, the formed acylal linkage is hydrolyzed in another formal SN2
event to release glucose from the enzyme active site. Next to retention of
configuration, the hydrolysis of interglycosidic bonds can also take place
with _inversion of configuration_ and is normally the result of direct SN2
displacement of a protonated aglycon by water. Although not necessarily
relevant for the product formation in nature (sugar hemiacetals being prone to
anomerize at physiological pH), the different mechanisms used by _retaining
glycosidases_ (involvement of a covalent intermediate) and _inverting
glycosidases_ (no covalent intermediate involved) bear consequences for their
use in glycan synthesis.

The use of glycosyltransferases in glycan synthesis requires access to the
natural donor glycosides, most often Leloir-type nucleotide sugars. Thus, the
intrinsic advantage of glycosyltransferase-mediated synthesis (excellent
regio- and stereoselectivity) can be offset by the relative scarcity of the
required donor glycosides. However, this disadvantage may be counteracted by
adding the biosynthetic enzymes that regenerate the consumed sugar
nucleotides. The power of glycosyltransferase-mediated glycan synthesis was
shown in the 1992 synthesis of sialyl Lewis x derivative **5** ([Figure
54.2](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f2/?report=objectonly)). Allyl lactoside
**2** , derived by chemical synthesis ([Chapter 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/)),
is reacted with CMP-sialic acid **1** using recombinant α2-3-sialyltransferase
(α2-3-SiaT) as the catalyst. The resulting trisaccharide **3** is further
extended with GDP-fucose **4** as the donor and recombinant fucosyltransferase
(FucT) as the catalyst to deliver allyl-sialyl Lewis x.

In the first step of the assembly line, the expensive nucleotide sugar, CMP-
sialic acid, is consumed, and upon transfer of the sialic acid, saccharide
cytosine monophosphate (CMP) is produced. With the aid of two consecutive
kinases (nucleoside monophosphate kinase and pyruvate kinase), CMP can be
transformed in situ into the corresponding triphosphate (CTP), which is then
condensed by the enzyme CMP-Neu5Ac with sialic acid to regenerate CMP-sialic
acid **2**.

The synthesis of GalNAc-GD1a heptasaccharide **7** equipped with a biotin at
the reducing end (replacing the sphingolipids present in the natural product)
was accomplished by submitting synthetic lactoside **6** to the consecutive
action of four glycosyltransferases, one of which (α2-3-SiaT) was used twice
([Figure 54.3](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f3/?report=objectonly)). By using
this method with various donor nucleotide sugars and glycosyltransferases, a
comprehensive series of glycosphingolipids and their analogs have been
obtained. The methodology, especially with respect to enzymatic sialic acid
introduction, is competitive when compared with chemical gangliosides
synthesis.

The synthesis of a comprehensive set of complex, asymmetrically branched
mammalian N-glycans was accomplished using the combined power of chemical and
glycosyltransferase-mediated enzymatic synthesis. As an example ([Figure
54.4](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f4/?report=objectonly)), decasaccharide
**8** was prepared via contemporary solution phase chemical oligosaccharide
synthesis ([Chapter 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/)). The asymmetrically branched
decasaccharide features two nonreducing galactopyranose moieties, one of which
is introduced as the tetra-acetate (in bold) whereas the other is unprotected.
Decasaccharide **8** is thus designed to allow for specific sialylation of the
unprotected galactose residue. After saponification, the intermediate
undecasaccharide is expanded to well-defined oligosaccharide **9** making use
of the substrate specificity of α1-3-fucosyltransferase (α1-3-FucT,
introduction of two fucopyranoses), β1-4-galactosyltransferase (β1-2-GalT,
twice), β1-3-N-acetylglucosaminetransferase (β1-3-GlcNAcT), and finally the
sialic acid transferase, ST6Gal-I. The chemoenzymatic strategy proved flexible
and allowed for the generation of a diverse panel of _N_ -glycans where the
reducing end is available for bioconjugation and for the preparation of glycan
microarrays for protein binding studies.

In contrast to glycosyltransferase-mediated reactions, in which the
equilibrium is shifted predominantly to (natural) product formation because of
the intrinsic reactivity of donor glycosides, the equilibrium in a
glycosidase-mediated reaction can be influenced such that the reaction
proceeds in the opposite direction.

Under physiological conditions, with high water concentrations, glycosidases
hydrolyze glycosidic linkages to produce the corresponding hemiacetal, either
with retention of configuration ([Figure
54.5A](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f5/?report=objectonly)) or with inversion
of configuration at the anomeric center. Performing a glycosidase reaction in
partly nonaqueous conditions, by addition of large excess of aglycon, by
inducing kinetic conditions or by a combination of these, allows for partial
reversal of the reaction equilibrium. By this means and in a
_transglycosylation_ event, glycans have been constructed. Disadvantages of
this method are that reaction conditions may be adverse to enzyme reactivity
and/or stability and, moreover, that the formed product is in essence a
substrate for glycosidase-catalyzed hydrolysis. This caveat can be
circumvented by making use of mutant glycosidases ([Figure
54.5B](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f5/?report=objectonly)), in which the
catalytic nucleophile in case of retaining glycosidases is mutated to an
innocent bystander (depicted is an Asp to Ala substitution). Such a
_glycosynthase_ can be used to react a synthetic donor glycoside that bears
the anomeric configuration corresponding to the intermediate enzyme glycosyl
covalent adduct ([Figure
54.1](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f1/?report=objectonly)) with an appropriate
nucleophile to construct an interglycosidic linkage. The main advantage of
this strategy is that, in principle, the mutant glycosidase has largely lost
the ability to hydrolyze the formed product, because of the absence of the
catalytic nucleophile. Many glycosidases and, in recent years, inverting
glycosidases have been adapted to glycosynthases, and have produced an array
of glycans.

The strategy is exemplified by the synthesis of flavonoid glucoside **13**
([Figure 54.6](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f6/?report=objectonly)). Synthetic
α-fluorolactoside **10** is treated with phenol **11** in the presence of the
E197S mutant of the _Humicola insolens_ Cel7B endoglucosidase. This
glycosynthase proved highly flexible with respect to the acceptor phenol,
allowing for the construction of a small library of flavonoid glycosides
represented by phenolic disaccharide **12**. Subsequent enzymatic removal of
the nonreducing galactospyranoside provided flavonoid glucoside **13**.

By combining of the strengths of glycosyltransferases, glycosynthases, and
chemical synthesis, the total synthesis of ganglioside LLG-3 from the
neurogenic starfish was accomplished ([Figure
54.7](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f7/?report=objectonly)). _N-_
Carboxybenzyl(Cbz)-protected CMP-sialic acid **17** was prepared by first
performing a Neu5Ac aldolase catalyzed aldol reaction of mannosamine
derivative **14** and pyruvate **15**. The resulting sialic-acid derivative
**16** was reacted with CTP under the agency of CMP-Neu5Ac synthetase to give
donor sialoside **17**. In a sialyl transferase catalyzed reaction, compound
**17** was condensed with α-fluorolactoside **10** to give trisaccharide
**18** , where the amine was unmasked by palladium-catalyzed hydrogenolysis to
give trisaccharide, equipped with an anomeric fluoride for glycosynthesis and
an amine for chemical amide bond formation. The sequence commenced by
condensation of synthetic sialic acid derivative **20** with the free amine in
**19** under amide bond-forming conditions, to give **21**. Condensation of
tetrasaccharidyl fluoride **21** with the double (E351S/D341Y) mutant of the
bacterial endoglycosidases, EGCase II, gave lysolipids **23** in good yield.
The free amine in **23** can be condensed with a fatty acid or alternatively
with a fluorescent reporter group.

Glycosynthases derived from endoglycosidases have finally been subject of
numerous studies aimed at the construction of structurally well-defined _N_
-glycoproteins ([Figure
54.8](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f8/?report=objectonly)). Hexosaminidases,
both exo- and endo-, hydrolyze N-acetylglucosamine containing glycosidic
linkages with retention of configuration. In contrast to most other retaining
glycosidases, hexosaminidases do not use an enzyme active site nucleophile in
the nucleophilic displacement of the aglycon, but rather use the N-acetyl
group for this purpose ([Figure
54.8](/books/NBK453031/figure/ch54.f8/?report=objectonly) insert). As a
result, an intermediate oxazolinium ion intermediate is produced that after
nucleophilic attack of water yields the hemi-acetal with retention of
configuration. Endo-hexosaminidases can be used in transglycosylation
reactions and, in mutant form, as glycosynthases.

A demonstration of an endo-hexosaminidase derived glycosynthase in action is
given by the synthesis of the Man9GlcNAc2-glycopeptide **28** from the
glycoprotein HIV-1. The sequence of steps commences with homogeneous
Man9GlcNAc2Asn **24** that can be prepared by exhaustive (pronase) proteolytic
digestion of soybean glycoproteins. Wild-type endohexosaminidase, Endo-A,
recognizes this high-mannose N-glycan and hydrolyses the GlcNAc-GlcNAc
interglycosidic linkage, to yield Man9GlcNAc **25**. After peracetylation,
treatment with trimethylsilyl bromide and borontrifluoride etherate and global
deprotection provided oxazolidinium ion **27**. This compound is a good
substrate for mutant (N175A) endohexosaminidase, endo-M, which was identified
by site-directed mutagenesis as a putative glycosynthase activity. In the
final step, the efficacy of the endo-M glycosynthase was shown by the
construction, from **26** and **27** , of high-mannose N-glycan **28**.

Enzymatic synthesis has proven to be a powerful methodology for the
construction of complex glycans. [Chemoenzymatic
synthesis](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/chemoenzymaticsynthesis/) is thus
emerging as a suitable alternative for chemical synthesis, as shown by the
many applications of sialyltransferases for the construction of complicated or
intractable sialic acid–containing glycans. The marriage of enzymatic
synthesis and chemical synthesis is very promising. The elaboration by means
of glycosyltransferases and/or glycosynthases has proven to be a highly
effective strategy to prepare large and complex glycoconjugates. To date, no
all-encompassing solution for the preparation of each and every glycan
exists—not by means of enzymatic synthesis, not through chemical synthesis nor
by a combination of these methods. Advances in chemical and enzymatic
syntheses provides, in principle, the means to construct most natural or
designed glycans.

The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by
Nathaniel Finney and David Rabuka and appreciate helpful comments and
suggestions from Abubakar Jalloh, Chelsea Painter, Eillen Tecle, and Paeton L.
Wantuch.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.055

The use of chemical tools to inhibit glycosylation provides a powerful
approach for studying glycan functions and serves as a starting point for drug
discovery. This chapter discusses various types of inhibitors, including
natural products, substrate-based tight-binding inhibitors, glycoside primers,
inhibitors found through screening chemical libraries, and examples of
rationally designed inhibitors based on three-dimensional structures of
enzymes.

[Chapters 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/), [45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/), and
[49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/) describe various natural and induced mutants with
defects in glycosylation. These mutants have helped to define genes that
encode various transferases and glycosidases, and in some cases alternate
biosynthetic pathways have been uncovered. Mutants also provide insights into
the function of glycosylation in cells and tissues and models for human inborn
errors in metabolism and disease. However, one limitation of studying mutants
is that the analyses are usually restricted to the cell or organism from which
the mutant strain was isolated. Additionally, many mutations are lethal in
animals, which makes the study of the gene in adult animals more difficult.

Inhibitors of glycosyltransferases and glycosidases provide another approach
for studying glycosylation in cells, tissues, and whole organisms that avoids
some of the problems associated with studying mutants. Many of these compounds
are small molecules that are taken up readily by a variety of cell types and
some can be absorbed through the gut, providing an opportunity for designing
drugs to treat human diseases and disorders correlated with altered
glycosylation ([Chapter 57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). Because the field is
quite large, only a selection of inhibitors that act on specific enzymes or
metabolic pathways and that illustrate certain basic concepts are discussed
here ([Table 55.1](/books/NBK453074/table/CH55TB1/?report=objectonly)). Agents
that block protein/carbohydrate interactions are surveyed in [Chapter
29](/books/n/glyco3/ch29/), and the aminoglycoside antibiotics are discussed
briefly in [Chapter 57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/).

A number of inhibitors have been described that block glycosylation by
interfering with the metabolism of common precursors or intracellular
transport activities. Some of these compounds act indirectly by impeding the
transit of proteins between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi, and _trans_
-Golgi network. For example, the fungal metabolite brefeldin A causes
retrograde transport of Golgi components located proximal to the _trans_
-Golgi network back to the ER. Thus, treating cells with brefeldin A separates
enzymes located in the _trans_ -Golgi network from those found in the ER and
Golgi, and uncouples the assembly of the core structures of some glycans from
later reactions, such as sialylation or sulfation. The drug can be used to
examine if two pathways reside in the same compartment or share the same
enzymes. Because the localization and array of the enzymes vary considerably
in different cell types, extrapolating the effects of brefeldin A from one
system to another is often difficult.

Some inhibitors act at key steps in intermediary metabolism in which
precursors involved in glycosylation are formed. For example, a glutamine
analog, 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine (DON), blocks glutamine:
fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase, the enzyme of the hexosamine
biosynthetic pathway that forms glucosamine from fructose and glutamine
([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). Depressing glucosamine production in this
way has a pleiotropic effect on glycan assembly because all of the major
families contain _N_ -acetylglucosamine or _N_ -acetylgalactosamine. DON also
affects other glutamine using enzymes and, therefore, care should be taken to
limit nonspecific side effects. Chlorate is another type of general inhibitor
that blocks sulfation. The chlorate anion (ClO4−) is an analog of sulfate
(SO42−) and it forms an abortive complex with the sulfurylase involved in the
formation of phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS), the active sulfate
donor for all known sulfation reactions. Thus, treating cells with chlorate
(usually 10–30 mm) inhibits sulfation by >90%, but the effect is not specific
for any particular class of glycan or sulfation reaction (e.g., tyrosine
sulfation is also affected).

A number of sugar analogs have been made with the hope that they might show
selective inhibition of glycosylation. 2-Deoxyglucose and fluorinated analogs
of sugars (3-deoxy-3-fluoroglucosamine, 4-deoxy-4-fluoroglucosamine,
6-deoxy-6-fluoro- _N_ -acetylglucosamine, 2-deoxy-2-fluoroglucose,
2-deoxy-2-fluoromannose, 2-deoxy-2-fluorofucose, and 3-fluorosialic acid)
inhibit glycoprotein biosynthesis, but the mechanism underlying the inhibitory
effect is unclear in many cases. Early studies of 2-deoxyglucose showed that
the analog was converted to UDP-2-deoxyglucose as well as to
GDP-2-deoxyglucose and dolichol-P-2-deoxyglucose. Inhibition of glycoprotein
formation apparently occurs as a result of accumulation of various dolichol
oligosaccharides containing 2-deoxyglucose, which cannot be elongated or
transferred to glycoproteins normally. Similarly, 4-deoxy- _N_
-acetylglucosamine is converted to UDP-4-deoxy- _N_ -acetylglucosamine,
resulting in inhibition of heparan sulfate formation without incorporation of
the analog. 4-Deoxy-xylose also inhibits glycosaminoglycan assembly presumably
by competing with naturally occurring xylosylated substrates. Care must be
taken in interpreting the results of experiments using these compounds because
they may have pleiotropic effects on glycan assembly caused by overlap of
nucleotide precursors.

A number of natural products have been found to alter glycosylation.
Tunicamycin belongs to a class of nucleoside antibiotics composed of uridine,
an 11-carbon disaccharide called aminodeoxydialdose (tunicamine), and a fatty
acid of variable length (13 to 17 carbons), branching, and unsaturation
([Figure 55.1](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f1/?report=objectonly)).
Tunicamycin was first identified in _Streptomyces lysosuperificus_ , and
related compounds were found later in other microorganisms. It derives its
name from its antiviral activity, which occurs by inhibiting viral coat (or
“tunica”) formation.

Tunicamycin inhibits N-glycosylation in eukaryotes by blocking the transfer of
_N_ -acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate (GlcNAc-1-P) from UDP-GlcNAc to dolichol-P
(catalyzed by GlcNAc phosphotransferase; GPT), thereby decreasing the
formation of dolichol-PP-GlcNAc ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). Other
GlcNAc transferase reactions are not inhibited (e.g., GlcNAcTI–V), but the
transfer of GlcNAc-1-P to undecaprenyl-P and the formation of undecaprenyl-PP-
MurNAc pentapeptide (which is involved in bacterial peptidoglycan
biosynthesis) are sensitive to tunicamycin ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). Tunicamycin acts as a tight-binding competitive
inhibitor, presumably because it resembles the donor nucleotide sugar. The Ki
value for tunicamycin is ∼5 × 10−8 m, whereas the Km value for UDP-GlcNAc is
∼3 × 10−6 m. The actual amount of tunicamycin needed to inhibit glycosylation
varies in different cells (0.1–10 µg/mL), possibly because of variable uptake
and culture conditions or differences in the level of expression of the
phosphotransferase. Given the key role of N-glycosylation in protein folding
and quality control in the ER ([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)), it is not
suprising that tunicamycin is cytotoxic to cells, and that resistant mutants
overproduce GPT. Similarly, transfection of cells with the cloned GPT confers
resistance, suggesting that the variable dose of inhibitor required in
different cells may reflect variation in enzyme levels.

Tunicamycin has been used extensively for studying the role of N-glycans in
glycoprotein maturation, secretion, and function, since its first discovery in
1973. The drug induces apoptosis preferentially in cancer cells, presumably
because of alterations in glycosylation of various cell-surface receptors and
signaling molecules and by inducing ER stress ([Chapter
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)). Thus, inhibition of N-glycan formation could be
useful for treating cancer patients. Other potential applications include
substrate reduction therapy for treatment of lysosomal storage disorders
([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)), congenital disorders of glycosylation
([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)), or naturally occurring mutations that
create N-glycosylation sites in cell-surface receptors (gain-of-glycosylation
mutants; [Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).

Amphomycin, a lipopeptide, inhibits dolichol-P-mannose synthesis by apparently
forming complexes with the carrier lipid dolichol-P. Other lipophilic
compounds that bind lipid intermediates in bacterial cell wall synthesis also
have also been studied ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)).

Plant alkaloids block N-linked glycosylation by inhibiting the processing
glycosidases (α-glucosidases and α-mannosidases) involved in trimming nascent
chains ([Table 55.2](/books/NBK453074/table/CH55TB2/?report=objectonly)).
Unlike tunicamycin, which blocks glycosylation of glycoproteins entirely, the
alkaloids inhibit the trimming reactions that occur after the Glc3Man9GlcNAc2
oligosaccharide is attached to a glycoprotein ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)), resulting in the appearance of glycoproteins on the
cell surface lacking the characteristic termini found on mature N-glycans
([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). α-Glucosidase inhibitors involved in
the initial processing of N-glycans and in quality control of protein folding
([Chapter 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)) include castanospermine (from the seed
of the Australian chestnut tree, _Castanosperum australe_ ), which inhibits
α-glucosidases I and II, australine (also from _C. australe_ ), which
preferentially inhibits α-glucosidase I, and deoxynojirimycin (from
_Streptomyces_ species), which preferentially inhibits α-glucosidase II
([Table 55.2](/books/NBK453074/table/CH55TB2/?report=objectonly)).
Castanospermine and australine cause accumulation of fully glucosylated
chains, whereas deoxynojirimycin results in chains containing one to two
glucose residues. Unexpectedly, treating cells with these inhibitors revealed
that some trimming of the mannose residues could occur independently of
removal of the glucose residues ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)).

Swainsonine was first discovered in plants from the western United States (
_Astragalus_ species, also known as locoweed) and Australia ( _Swainsona
canescens_ ), and was later found in the fungus _Rhizoctonia leguminocola_
that infects red clover. Consumption of these plants by animals causes a
severe abnormality called locoism and accumulation of glycoproteins in the
lymph nodes. Swainsonine inhibits α-mannosidase II, causing the accumulation
of paucimannose oligosaccharides (Man4GlcNAc2 and Man5GlcNAc2) and hybrid-type
chains at the expense of complex oligosaccharides. In addition, swainsonine
also inhibits the lysosomal α-mannosidase. Mannostatin A works in a similar
way, but differs significantly in structure from swainsonine ([Table
55.2](/books/NBK453074/table/CH55TB2/?report=objectonly)). Other mannosidase
inhibitors include deoxymannojirimycin and kifunensin, which selectively
inhibit α-mannosidase I. These agents cause the accumulation of Man7–9GlcNAc2
oligosaccharides on glycoproteins.

All of the above listed inhibitors have in common polyhydroxylated ring
systems that mimic the orientation of hydroxyl groups in the natural
substrates, but a strict correlation between stereochemistry and enzyme target
(α-glucosidase vs. α-mannosidase) does not exist. The compounds contain
nitrogen, usually in place of the ring oxygen. One idea is that the nitrogen
in the protonated state may mimic the positive charge on the ring oxygen that
arises from delocalization of charge from the tentative carbocation at C-1
generated during the hydrolysis reaction. Crystal structures for the
α-mannosidase are available with bound inhibitors.

Alkylated and acylated analogs of the alkaloids have interesting and useful
properties. _N_ -Butylation of deoxynojirimycin actually converts the
glucosidase inhibitor into an inhibitor of glycolipid biosynthesis. Alkylation
of the amino group or acylation of the hydroxyl groups can improve the potency
of the compound, presumably by facilitating uptake across the plasma and Golgi
membranes. Some of these compounds have shown positive effects for treating
diabetes, lysosomal storage diseases, cancer, and HIV infection, but also
induces male sterility (see [Chapter 57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)).

Few inhibitors are available that block O-linked glycans compared with
N-linked glycan biosynthesis. [Mucin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/mucin/)-type O-linked glycan biosynthesis is initiated by polypeptidyl
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (ppGalNAcTs), a large family of enzymes
that use UDP-GalNAc as a common donor and various glycoprotein acceptors
([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)). Screening a synthetic library of
uridine analogs against members of the ppGalNAcT family yielded two compounds
that disrupt O-GalNAc addition ([Figure
55.2](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f2/?report=objectonly)). These compounds
have Ki values of ∼8 µm with respect to UDP-GalNAc. Like tunicamycin, these
inhibitors suppress glycosylation without selectivity for different
glycoprotein targets. These first-generation enzyme inhibitors work on
O-linked glycans and raise the possibility that inhibitors of specific
ppGalNAcT isoforms as well as other types of O-linked glycans, such as
O-xylose ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)), O-glucose ([Chapter
18](/books/n/glyco3/ch18/)), and O-GlcNAc ([Chapter
19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)) may be developed eventually.

The importance of O-GlcNAc addition to many cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins
([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)) has stimulated great interest in
developing agents to inhibit its addition by O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) or its
removal by O-GlcNAc-specific β-hexosaminidase (O-GlcNAcase). Alloxan and
streptozotocin affect O-GlcNAc addition, but these compounds lack specificity.
The first potentially useful OGT inhibitors were obtained by screening
chemical libraries for compounds that displaced a fluorescent derivative of
the donor sugar, UDP-GlcNAc. The active compounds do not block other _N_
-acetylglucosamine addition reactions—for example, one involved in formation
of the polysaccharide backbone of bacterial peptidoglycan ([Chapter
21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). In addition, 5-S-GlcNAc is another inhibitor of
OGT ([Figure 55.3](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f3/?report=objectonly)). Its
peracetylated form (Ac-5SGlcNAc), as well as a similar chemical inhibitor,
peracetyl 4-thio-GlcNAc (Ac-4SGlcNAc), crosses cell membranes and undergoes
deacetylation by nonspecific esterases to generate active inhibitors.

Several O-GlcNAcase inhibitors are based on _N_ -acetylglucosamine. The first
compound in this class, PUGNAc ( _O_ -[2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-
glucopyranosylidene]amino- _N_ -phenylcarbamate; [Figure
55.3](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f3/?report=objectonly)) inhibits
O-GlcNAcase at nanomolar concentrations, but also inhibits lysosomal
β-hexosaminidases (HexA and HexB; [Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)).
Thiamet-G and the related _N_ -acetylglucosamine-thiazoline (NAG-thiazoline)
are more specific and inhibit at lower concentrations than PUGNAc. A
rationally designed glucoimidazole, GlcNAcstatin, inhibits O-GlcNAcase with a
Ki of 4.6 pm and shows 105-fold selectivity over HexA and HexB. These
compounds inhibit the enzyme in cells and tissues, providing new tools to
study the function of O-GlcNAc, and are potential candidates for drug therapy.

A number of inhibitors of specific transferases have been developed based on
the concept that substrate analogs might act as tight-binding inhibitors. The
general strategy is to modify the hydroxyl group that acts as the nucleophile
during formation of the glycosidic bond or groups in its immediate vicinity
([Table 55.3](/books/NBK453074/table/CH55TB3/?report=objectonly)). Many
designer compounds lack inhibitory activity, because modification of the
targeted hydroxyl group prevents binding of the analog to the enzyme by
interfering with hydrogen bonding networks that position the substrate. In
other cases, the analogs show Ki values in the approximate range of the Km
values for the unmodified substrate. As one might expect, the analogs usually
act competitively with respect to the unmodified substrate, but in a few cases
the inhibition pattern is more complex, suggesting possible binding outside
the active site.

Nucleotide sugar analogs provide opportunities for blocking classes of enzymes
that use a common donor (e.g., all fucosyltransferases use GDP-fucose). A
large number of nucleotide sugar derivatives have been made (e.g., N- and
O-substituted analogs of UDP-GalNAc) and several inhibit the enzymes in vitro,
but have proven less useful in living cells because of poor uptake.
“Bisubstrate” analogs consist of the nucleoside sugar donor or PAPS covalently
linked to the acceptor substrate by way of a neutral bridging group. This
arrangement may generate inhibitors whose binding characteristics reflect the
product of the affinity constants for donor and acceptor (approximated by the
product of the individual Km values). Bisubstrates that have been made have Ki
values in the range of the Km values for the nucleotide donors, suggesting
that the correct geometry for the bridging group may have not been attained or
that the analog binds in ways that differ from the natural substrates.

The search for active compounds often benefits from serendipidy and the
synthesis of di-, tri-, and tetrasaccharides with the desired modifications is
rather labor intensive. Nevertheless, the approach has yielded insights into
the binding and reactivity of the enzymes, and substrate analogs with
selectivity for particular enzymes have been developed in this way. Because
many of the transferases have now been purified and cloned, we can look
forward to more detailed kinetic and crystallographic studies, which will
provide clues for deriving mechanism-based inhibitors in the future ([Chapter
6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)).

The utility of any glycosyltransferase inhibitor ultimately depends on its
ability to cross the plasma membrane and enter the Golgi where the
glycosyltransferases reside. Unfortunately, many of the compounds described
above lack activity in live cells, presumably because their polarity and
charge prevents their uptake. More than 40 years ago, Okayama and colleagues
found that D-xylose in β-linkage to a hydrophobic aglycone (the
noncarbohydrate portion of a glycoside; e.g., _p_ -nitrophenol) was taken up
rather efficiently and inhibited the assembly of glycosaminoglycans on
proteoglycans. Xylosides mimic the natural substrate, xylosylated serine
residues in proteoglycan core proteins, and thus act as a substrate. “Priming”
of chains occurs on the added xyloside, which diverts the assembly process
from the endogenous core proteins and causes inhibition of proteoglycan
formation. In general, cells incubated with xylosides secrete large amounts of
individual glycosaminoglycan chains and accumulate proteoglycans containing
truncated chains. The enormous success of β-D-xylosides in altering
proteoglycan biosynthesis suggested that other glycosides might act as
“primers” as well ([Table
55.4](/books/NBK453074/table/CH55TB4/?report=objectonly)). Subsequent studies
have shown that β- _N_ -acetylgalactosaminides prime oligosaccharides found on
mucins and inhibit O-glycosylation of glycoproteins. Other active glycosides
include β-glucosides, β-galactosides, β- _N_ -acetylglucosaminides, and even
disaccharides and trisaccharides. These latter compounds require conjugation
to appropriate aglycones and acetylation to neutralize the polar hydroxyl
groups on the sugars. Cells contain several carboxyesterases that remove the
acetyl groups and render the compounds available to the transferases in the
Golgi.

Priming by glycosides occurs in a concentration-dependent manner, but the
efficiency varies widely among different compounds and cell types. These
variations may relate to the relative abundance of endogenous substrates,
enzyme concentration and composition, the solubility of different glycosides,
their susceptibility to hydrolysis, their uptake across the plasma membrane
and into the Golgi, and their relative affinity for the glycosyltransferases.
The type of chain made on a given primer also depends on concentration and
aglycone structure, which may reflect selective partitioning of primers into
different intracellular compartments or into different branches of
biosynthetic pathways. Like priming, inhibition of glycoprotein, glycolipid,
or proteoglycan formation occurs in a dose-dependent fashion, but the blockade
is rarely complete, probably because of the inability of glycosides to mimic
the entire endogenous substrates.

Primers represent starting points for making analogs with tight-binding
inhibitor properties described above. Many of the compounds described in
[Table 55.3](/books/NBK453074/table/CH55TB3/?report=objectonly) could be
converted to permeable acylated glycosides and tested in live cells for
inhibitory activity. Active compounds could potentially become carbohydrate-
based drugs to treat glycosylation-dependent diseases.
[Oligosaccharide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oligosaccharide/) priming may
have beneficial effects as well. Xylosides, for example, can be absorbed
through the gut, and when consumed at sufficient concentration, they show
antithrombotic activity. Many glycosides occur naturally, because various
organisms (especially plants) produce hydrophobic compounds as part of
chemical defense and conjugate them to sugars to render them soluble. Thus,
the human diet may contain various types of glycosides with interesting (and
unknown) biological activities.

Care must be taken in interpreting the results of experiments using glycoside
primers. For example, β-D-xylosides also prime glycans related in structure to
glycosphingolipids and HNK-1. In some cases priming per se is not the
mechanism responsible for inhibition of glycosylation, but rather inhibition
occurs because of competitive binding of the primer to a target enzyme.
Finally, primers could deplete cells of nucleotide sugars and have multiple
effects on glycosylation. For example, 4-methyl-umbelliferone is often used to
block hyaluronan biosynthesis. The precise mechanism of action is unknown, but
is thought to involve depletion of UDP-GlcA because of glucuronidation of the
compound. Reduction of UDP-GlcA in turn could affect formation of sulfated
glycosaminoglycans and other glucuronic acid–containing glycans and alter the
pools of other nucleotide sugars, such as UDP-Xyl.

Reagents that can alter the assembly of glycolipids in cells have been
described. Xylosides have a mild effect on glycolipid formation, possibly
because of the similarity between xylose and glucose and the assembly of a
GM3-like compound (Neu5Acα2-3Galβ1-4Xylβ-O-R) on the primer. Because cells
will take up intermediates in glycolipid biosynthesis, they behave like
synthetic glycoside primers. For example, glucosylceramide will give rise to
complex glycolipids when fed to cells. On the basis of this observation, an
analog containing a reactive exocyclic epoxide group was prepared. The
compound inhibits glycolipid formation (IC50 ∼ 8 µm), presumably by reaction
of the epoxide with a nucleophile in the active site of lactosylceramide
synthase. D-threo-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol (D-PDMP),
an analog of glucosylceramide, was synthesized originally to inhibit
glucosylceramide synthesis in patients with Gaucher disease. However, this
compound directly inhibits the activity of purified lactosylceramide synthase.

As mentioned above, the α-glucosidase inhibitor, _N_ -butyldeoxynojirimycin,
has been used to inhibit glycosphingolipid formation because it blocks
glucosylceramide synthesis. This compound is now in clinical use for treating
type I Gaucher's disease, a lysosomal storage disorder in which
glucocerebrosidase is missing ([Chapter 44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)). Its
beneficial activity occurs through “substrate deprivation” by blocking
synthesis of glycosphingolipids, thereby “depriving” the lysosome of
substrate. Sphingolipid analogs ([Figure
55.4](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f4/?report=objectonly)) are more potent
inhibitors. Lengthening the hydrocarbon chain from 10 to 16 carbons further
enhances efficacy. These compounds can almost completely deplete glycolipids
in cells, and require only micromolar concentrations for activity.

Inhibitors of GPI anchor formation have also been described. Mannose analogs
(2-deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose and 2-deoxy-D-glucose) inhibit the formation of
dolichol-P-mannose in vivo and thus inhibit GPI biosynthesis. However, they
lack specificity because these agents also can affect other pathways dependent
on dolichol-P-mannose. Mannosamine inhibits GPI anchor formation both in
_Trypanosoma brucei_ and in mammalian cells by the formation of ManNH2-Man-
GlcN-PI. Apparently, mannosamine in its activated form (GDP-ManNH2) is used as
a substrate in the second mannosyltransferase reaction, but the ManNH2-Man-
GlcN-PI intermediate will not act as a substrate for the next α2-mannosyl-
transferase ([Chapter 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/)). GlcNR-phosphatidylinositols
with different substituents (R) act as substrate analogs and some act as
suicide inhibitors in vitro. Another class of inhibitors is based on fatty
acid analogs that only trypanosomes incorporate into GPI anchors.
Trypanosomes, unlike their mammalian hosts, incorporate myristic acid into GPI
anchors by exchanging myristic acid for other fatty acids in the
phosphatidylinositol moiety. By making a series of analogs, an inhibitor was
found that is highly toxic to trypanosomes in culture and nontoxic to
mammalian cells (10-[propoxy] decanoic acid). Such reagents are drug
candidates for treating trypanosomiasis, which is endemic in sub-Saharan
regions of Africa.

Studies of influenza neuraminidase exemplify the power of rationally designed
drugs. The crystal structure for influenza neuraminidase was obtained in 1983,
and since then many other enzymes have been characterized from other sources.
Even before the crystal structure had been obtained, a neuraminidase inhibitor
was deduced by assuming that the hydrolysis reaction probably involved a
transition state with a carbocation intermediate at C-2. This would result in
C-2 and C-3 adopting a trigonal planar (sp2) configuration, and therefore
compounds that mimicked this geometry were hoped to have inhibitory activity.
Indeed, Neu5Ac-2-ene (DANA; [Figure
55.5](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f5/?report=objectonly)) has a micromolar Ki
value. Interestingly, this compound works on most sialidases, but not on the
trypanosome _trans_ -sialidase and only weakly on bacterial sialidases.

Visual inspection of influenza neuraminidase with the inhibitor bound showed
that two glutamate residues lined a pocket near carbon 4 of the sialic acid
analog ([Figure 55.6](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f6/?report=objectonly)).
The pocket was fairly open, suggesting that a bulkier substituent at this
position might be tolerated, at least sterically. A substrate analog was
produced containing a positively charged guanidinium group instead of the
hydroxyl at carbon 4 (4-guanidino-DANA; [Figure
55.5](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f5/?report=objectonly)), creating an analog
with remarkable influenza neuraminidase inhibitor potency (Ki value of 10−11
m). The higher affinity was presumably due to an additional salt bridge formed
between the charged guanidinium group and the carboxylates lining the pocket.
The analog is nearly a million times less potent on human sialidases, leading
to its use as the anti-influenza drug Relenza ([Chapter
57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). It does not work on bacterial sialidases,
however, because the equivalent pocket is filled with an arginine group.

Subsequent studies substituted a cyclohexene to mimic the planar ring of the
proposed intermediate in hydrolysis. Good inhibitors were found and an orally
active analog is widely used, the oral anti-influenza drug Tamiflu ([Figure
55.5](/books/NBK453074/figure/ch55.f5/?report=objectonly); [Chapter
57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). As the crystal structures for other sialidases
are solved, the design of species-specific analogs may be possible. This
rational approach to inhibitor design holds great potential, not only for
neuraminidase inhibitors, but also for the design of compounds that might
block the activity of various glycosyltransferases.

A large family of Golgi sulfotransferases installs sulfate esters on a variety
of glycans using PAPS as the active sulfate donor. High-resolution crystal
structures are now available for both glycan-modifying sulfotransferases as
well as soluble drug detoxifying sulfotransferases. These enzymes have in
common a conserved fold that binds PAPS (see [Chapter
6](/books/n/glyco3/ch6/)). A series of small aromatic compounds (such as
2,6-dichloro-4-nitrophenol and pentachlorophenol) and several disaccharide
analogs of GlcNAc-6-sulfotransferase substrates have inhibitory activity.
Screening targeted libraries of purine derivatives yielded compounds with high
selectivity towards individual sulfotransferases, suggesting that subtle
differences in the PAPS-binding sites can be exploited.

The ability to screen large libraries against sulfotransferases has been
facilitated by the development of high-throughput assays. Most low-throughput
assays measure the transfer of [35S] from [35S]PAPS or measure the radiolabel
transfer to a carbohydrate substrate bearing a hydrophobic tail that can
easily be isolated using a reverse-phase cartridge. Some sulfotransferases
will catalyze the reverse reaction in the presence of high concentrations of a
sulfated donor. For example, β-arylsulfotransferase IV (β-AST-IV) will
catalyze the reverse transfer of the sulfuryl group from _p_ -nitrophenol
sulfate to PAP, generating PAPS and _p_ -nitrophenolate ion. When coupled to
another sulfotransferase of interest, β-AST-IV regenerates PAPS and
stoichiometric amounts of the ion, which can be monitored by UV absorbance.
The enzyme also will transfer sulfate to water. A library of 35,000 compounds
with purine and pyrimidine scaffolds was screened using β-AST-IV and a
fluorescence assay that measured desulfation of 4-methylumbelliferone sulfate.
Multiple hits were obtained with moderate inhibition, and subsequent structure
elaboration of the library resulted in the generation of a very tight binding
small molecule inhibitor with a Km value five orders of magnitude lower than
the natural substrate. In theory, this approach can be exploited for other
enzymes for which high-throughput assays can be developed.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Jarrod W. Barnes
and Marilda Lisboa.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.056

Knowledge of the cellular pathways of glycosylation across phylogeny provides
opportunities for designing glycans via genetic engineering in a wide variety
of cell types including bacteria, fungi, plant cells, and mammalian cells. The
commercial demand for glycosylation engineering is broad, including production
of biological therapeutics with defined glycosylation ([Chapter
57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). This chapter describes how knowledge of glycan
structures and their metabolism (Parts I–III of this book) has led to the
current state of glycosylation engineering in different cell types.
Perspectives for rapid advances in this area using precise gene editing
technologies are also described.

There is a long history of engineering glycosylation in mammalian cells,
plants, fungi (yeast), and bacteria using genetic strategies, and many well-
characterized glycosylation mutants are available ([Chapters
20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)–[27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/) and
[49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). Today, cellular glycoengineering is used
extensively to produce recombinant therapeutic glycoproteins that require
glycosylation for their efficacy and at the same time must have human-
compatible glycosylation to avoid immune responses to nonhuman glycans.
[Glycosylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycosylation/) can alter the
size, charge, and solubility of therapeutic glycoproteins to prevent rapid
clearance from the circulation. In addition, glycoengineering has been used to
improve or develop new therapeutic modalities ([Chapter
57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). Glycans can also serve as ligands for lectin
receptors that target therapeutics to certain cells. Of particular importance
is the role of N-glycosylation for effector functions of IgG antibodies;
therapeutic IgG antibodies with N-glycosylation designed to improve their
cytotoxic properties are in clinical use. In the past decade, new methods have
emerged to precisely engineer glycosylation by gene editing, and with
increased knowledge the field seems to be limited only by imagination.

Cell lines are widely used as factories to produce recombinant glycoproteins
from introduced gene constructs. The most common factories for glycoproteins
include yeast, plants, insect cells, nonhuman mammalian cells, and more rarely
human cells. More recently, bacteria are also being engineered to accommodate
production of glycoproteins. The glycosylation capabilities of different
species vary substantially in terms of both the sites of glycan attachment and
the glycans attached ([Figure
56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly) and [Chapters
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)–[27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)). A first step in
glycoengineering strategies is therefore to consider which cell type to use.
This decision requires detailed knowledge of glycosylation pathways and genes.
Historically, the mammalian Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line has played a
dominant role, and today most biologics are produced in CHO cells ([Chapter
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). The CHO line was selected for human therapeutic
production because its glycosylation is relatively simple and similar to that
in humans. The CHO cell line produces a comparatively narrow repertoire of
glycans; glycoengineering expands their native capabilities and provides for
additional optimization of glycoforms. Alternatively, host species in which
native glycosylation provides a simpler starting point for engineering can be
selected. For example, glycoproteins for enzyme replacement therapies have
been produced in yeast and glycan vaccines have been made in bacteria.

There have been major achievements in glycoengineering of cells from bacteria
to yeast and “higher” eukaryotes ([Table
56.1](/books/NBK453027/table/CH56TB1/?report=objectonly) and [Chapter
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). New precise gene editing technologies described
below will enable glycoengineering in a wide variety of species and open
opportunities for selection from host cells based on optimal production
efficiency and production of human-like glycans. Common principles in
glycoengineering via gene editing are described below, followed by more
detailed descriptions of progress in cells from various species.

Although the glycomes of different species have distinct features ([Figure
56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly)), the basic
biosynthetic machinery and pathways are remarkably conserved in eukaryotes,
and there are even similarities with glycosylation pathways in some bacteria
and archaea. Most enzymes involved in glycosylation in eukaryotes are highly
conserved in fungi, plants, and animals facilitating the design and execution
of glycoengineering strategies in these organisms. Nevertheless, current
knowledge is far from complete and glycoengineering across species is still in
its infancy. Whereas expression of a particular protein in a heterologous host
may require only introduction of the single gene for that protein, precise
glycosylation engineering of that protein may require cointroduction of a
suite of genes including those required for the biosynthesis and transport of
appropriate activated nucleotide sugar donors as well as multiple
glycosyltransferases.

Successful glycoengineering requires knowledge of the glycosyltransferase
genes and substrates required to direct synthesis of a particular glycan.
Certain genes may need to be removed and others inserted to create
biosynthetic pathways that produce the glycans of interest. Three decades of
glycogene discoveries have resulted in the identification of most genes
encoding glycosyltransferases, hydrolases, and other enzymes involved in
synthesizing and metabolizing the glycans of “higher” eukaryotic cells and the
“rules” of the biosynthetic pathways involved ([Chapters
8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)–[19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Different glycosylation
pathways may be performed independently by different sets of enzymes, or in
some cases, may share enzymes. Enzymes working in consecutive order to
assemble mature glycans generally work independently, although there may also
be cooperative effects. In principle, there is sufficient knowledge to predict
the role of individual enzymes and assign them to specific pathways, allowing
in silico prediction of the enzyme repertoire required to generate a
particular glycan on a particular glycoconjugate. An excellent resource in
this regard is the classification of homologous gene families from diverse
species in the “[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/carbohydrate/)-Active Enzymes” ([CAZy](http://www.cazy.org/)) database
([Chapter 8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)).

Among the prerequisites for glycoengineering a desired glycan in a chosen host
is that the appropriate repertoire of activated sugar donors and their
transporters are present ([Chapter 5](/books/n/glyco3/ch5/)). This is
especially important when engineering glycosylation in prokaryotes or
nonmammalian eukaryotes in which the nucleotide sugar donors required to
synthesize therapeutics with human glycosylation may not be present. For
example, yeast and plants do not produce UDP-GalNAc, and many organisms do not
produce CMP-sialic acids.

Different genetic strategies may be used to alter the glycosylation
capabilities of cells. Knockdown and nontargeted overexpression have been used
for many years, although precisely targeted gene editing strategies have only
recently been introduced.

Reducing undesirable glycosyltransferase activities in cells has been achieved
by gene silencing strategies. Whereas this has been particularly successful in
plants and Drosophila, silencing has not gained wide use in glycoengineering
mammalian cell lines because the low efficiency of knockdown often leaves
substantial glycosyltransferase activity remaining.

Adding desirable glycosyltransferase activities is achieved by transfection of
glycogenes from any organism, random integration of plasmid DNA and antibiotic
selection of stable clones. Although this strategy is successful, it provides
little control over site(s) of genomic integration, gene copy number, or gene
expression levels. Overexpression of enzymes can lead to disruption of normal
glycosylation patterns and unpredictable glycosylation. Instability of the
introduced glycosylation traits and the use of antibiotics for selection have
also been problematic for the long-term use of such engineered cells for
production of therapeutic glycoproteins.

Knockout of glycosylation genes to eliminate unwanted glycans has long been a
simple task in bacteria and yeast. Although powerful, knockout or knockin
strategies have been time consuming and difficult to use in “higher”
eukaryotic cells (consider the _Fut8_ knockout in CHO cells described below),
these difficulties were substantially reduced with the introduction of
nuclease-based precise gene editing tools including zinc-finger nucleases,
transcription activator–like effector nucleases (TALENs), and clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat/targeted Cas9 endonuclease
(CRISPR/Cas9), which enable highly specific gene manipulation in all cell
types ([Figure 56.2](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f2/?report=objectonly);
[Chapters 27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/) and [49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)).
Importantly, these tools are not limited to gene knockout or knockin but can
also be used to activate endogenous silent genes, edit gene sequences to mimic
hypomorphic disease mutations, and insert foreign genes at specific genomic
sites.

Precise gene editing can insert foreign genes at “safe harbor” sites in the
genome to ensure stable expression and avoid interfering with endogenous gene
expression. One such “safe harbor” in human cells is the AAVS1 site on
chromosome 19 known to enable stable expression of transgenes without adverse
effects. However, precise genetic engineering allows insertion of one or more
foreign genes at any position in the genome. For example, precise knockin of
glycogenes can be combined with knockout by inserting an exogenous gene in
place of an unwanted endogenous gene. Precise knockin strategies also enable
control of the number of copies inserted, and can be used to insert entire
landing platforms of multiple genes inserted consecutively.

Successful expression of an enzyme or transporter for glycoengineering
requires that the expressed protein finds its way to the correct subcellular
compartment. Heterologous expression of type 2 Golgi transmembrane
glycosyltransferases, for example, often requires testing different Golgi
retention sequences. Although design guidance is available, this is often a
trial and error exercise, and in some cases a combinatorial screening is
required to identify the optimal construct.

The most common bacterium used for heterologous protein production,
_Escherichia coli_ , does not have the native capacity to glycosylate
proteins. However, research in the last two decades identified N- and
O-glycoproteins, and the glycosylation pathways responsible for their
biosynthesis, in the pathogenic proteobacterium _Campylobacter jejuni_ and
other bacterial species. Moreover, several bacterial toxins have
glycosyltransferase domains that exert their pathogenicity by glycosylating
highly specific amino acids in key host proteins to interfere with essential
cellular functions. [Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/) discusses
glycosylation in Eubacteria. Another unique feature of bacteria is that sugar
nucleotide donors are synthesized and remain in the cytosol, so that
engineered glycosylation must take place in the cytosol unless nucleotide
sugar transporters are introduced.

Bacteria efficiently produce free and lipid-linked oligo- and polysaccharides
including capsular polysaccharides (CPSs) and lipopolysaccharides (LPSs)
([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)), and these pathways have been engineered
to produce a variety of complex human-like glycans. In particular, the LPS
pathway has been used to engineer and display glycans in _E. coli_. LPS
consists of a base lipid (lipid A) linked to a core oligosaccharide followed
by highly diverse O-polysaccharides (O-antigens). Genetically interrupting
biosynthesis of the lipid A core oligosaccharide prevents coupling of the
O-antigen, instead allowing engineering of novel glycans on lipid A for
display on the cell surface. This strategy has been used to engineer the
synthesis of a variety of human glycan epitopes, including blood group
antigens and cancer-associated glycolipid glycans.

Two types of native protein N-glycosylation occur in some bacteria, although
not in _E. coli_. One type is similar to eukaryotic cell N-glycosylation with
production of a lipid-linked oligosaccharide in the cytosol which is then
transferred en bloc to Asn residues by an oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) in
the periplasm. The OST of _C. jejuni_ , PglB, is a single polypeptide related
to the catalytic STT3 subunits of the multiprotein OST complex of eukaryotes.
PglB shows a more restricted acceptor sequence motif than the eukaryotic
N-X-S/T, with requirement of an acidic residue (D/EXNXS/T, in which X cannot
be P) ([Chapter 21](/books/n/glyco3/ch21/)). This places some restrictions on
the usefulness of engineering human-like N-glycans, because most N-glycan
sites in mammalian proteins do not conform to this extended consensus
sequence. PglBs from other species or mutants evolved by adaptive evolution
may solve this problem in the future. Importantly, PglB has rather relaxed
donor substrate specificity. Although bacterial lipid-linked oligosaccharides
are distinct from those in eukaryotes, PglB can use mammalian type lipid-
linked oligosaccharides as donors.

An important feature for using prokaryotes for glycoengineering is the
arrangement of entire glycosylation machineries in multigene operons. This
enables the transfer of large genetic elements of 10–20 kb between species. A
major achievement was the successful transfer of the entire N-glycosylation
operon from _C. jejuni_ to _E. coli_ , producing N-linked glycoproteins in _E.
coli_ ([Table 56.1](/books/NBK453027/table/CH56TB1/?report=objectonly)).
Production of glycoproteins carrying a Man3GlcNAc2 core N-glycan has been
achieved by introduction of eukaryotic enzymes, and the engineering of more
complex glycans may be possible. Bacterial N-linked glycosylation is being
exploited as an alternative method for glycoconjugate vaccine production, and
vaccines against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria have been
developed.

Another type of N-glycosylation found in γ-proteobacteria involves a cytosolic
N-glycosyltransferase (NGT) that targets the N-X-S/T acceptor sequence motif
recognized by mammalian OST ([Chapter 9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)). NGT transfers
a single monosaccharide (e.g., Glc) from an activated sugar nucleotide donor,
with loose donor substrate specificity that includes both UDP and GDP sugar
nucleotides. This provides an entirely new approach to engineering
N-glycosylation with a wide array of glycans that cannot be engineered in
eukaryotic cells. Although further engineering of this pathway in bacteria has
not been reported, attached Glc residues in glycoproteins have been used for
postexpression conjugation of mammalian-type oligosaccharides.

A limitation of bacteria for glycoengineering is that most bacteria do not
have the capacity for sialylation and do not synthesize CMP-sialic acid. To
introduce sialylation, it is necessary to insert the entire sialylation
pathway as has been performed in other organisms. However, some bacteria do
sialylate lipid-linked oligosaccharides using sialyltransferases with
specificities similar to some of those in mammals.

Protein O-glycosylation in bacteria is unlike the stepwise biosynthesis of
O-glycans in eukaryotes ([Chapter 10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)), in that
preassembled undecaprenol-PP-linked oligosaccharides are transferred en bloc
to proteins by several OSTs ( _PglL_ , _PilO_ , _PglA_ , and _PglO_ ) with
relaxed donor substrate specificities and poorly understood acceptor substrate
specificities. Bacteria may also have OST–independent O-glycosylation pathways
controlled by glycosyltransferases using activated sugar donors. Although
engineering of the endogenous O-glycosylation machinery of bacteria has not
been performed, human O-glycosylation has been engineered into _E. coli_ by
introducing mammalian polypeptide GalNAc-transferase genes and a UDP-
Glc/GlcNAc C4-epimerase to produce O-GalNAc glycosylation. Site-specific
introduction of GalNAc residues has been used for postexpression enzymatic
addition of polyethylene glycol (PEG)-derivatized sialic acids to enhance the
therapeutic properties of protein drugs.

Yeast natively produce N-linked glycans and O-mannosyl glycans on diverse
glycoproteins. The general features of the biosynthetic pathways for initial
glycan transfer are common in eukaryotes from yeast to human, and the enzymes
involved are highly homologous. However, subsequent glycan processing in yeast
generally results in polymannosylated glycans instead of the complex N- and
O-glycans found in “higher” eukaryotes ([Figure
56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly)). Yeast have similar
systems for protein folding, quality control, and posttranslational
modifications to “higher” eukaryotic cells, in contrast to bacteria. Because
genetic engineering in yeast has long been rapid and easy, experience with
glycoengineering is more advanced in this organism compared with most others.
Several commercial ventures have been based on engineering “humanized”
N-glycosylation in yeast; GlycoFi Inc. claimed to have engineered yeast
expressing biantennary N-glycans capped by sialic acids, but many years have
passed without commercial application. Independently, a related engineering
strategy that also eliminates Man-P modifications of N-glycans has been
developed (GlycoSwitch).

N-glycans on yeast glycoproteins differ from those in vertebrates ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)), comprising large polymannosyl glycans on a
poly(Manα1-6)n backbone which are highly immunogenic in mammals ([Chapter
23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)). A key α1-6-mannosyltransferase, Och1p largely
initiates polymannosylation. Knockout of the _OCH1_ gene, however, does not
completely abrogate polymannosylation and additional knockout of mannosyl- and
phosphomannosyltransferases, dependent on yeast strain, are needed to achieve
a homogenous Man8GlcNAc2 N-glycan suitable for further engineering. Reducing
Man8GlcNAc2 to Man5GlcNAc2 is achieved by expressing an α1-2–mannosidase in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), creating a convenient platform for generating
complex N-glycans. Introduction of GlcNAcT-I ( _MGAT1_ ) in the Golgi
initiates complex N-glycan synthesis, and further addition of α3/6-mannosidase
II ( _MAN2A1_ ) and GlcNAcT-II ( _MGAT2_ ) results in the biantennary
GlcNAc2Man3GlcNAc2 N-glycan suitable for appending galactosylation and
sialylation by further engineering. Some yeast species, including _Pichia
pastoris_ , do not contain UDP-Gal, and all yeast lack the native ability to
synthesize CMP-Neu5Ac, so considerable engineering with introduction of
multiple genes is required to obtain mature complex N-glycans. Although the
engineering appears simple in silico, considerable efforts have been devoted
to identifying optimal chimeric gene constructs with respect to both catalytic
efficiency and ER/Golgi targeting.

Yeast performs extensive co- and posttranslational ER protein O-mannosylation
([Chapter 23](/books/n/glyco3/ch23/)) using several polypeptide
mannosyltransferases (PMTs). _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ has six PMTs and only
a subset can be knocked out without reducing viability. Protein O-Man residues
undergo polymannosylation in the Golgi. “Higher” eukaryotes also perform
O-mannosylation and express two PMT orthologs, _POMT1_ and _POMT2_ ([Chapter
13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)), but these have much narrower acceptor substrate
specificities. However, “higher” eukaryotes perform several other types of
O-glycosylation ([Figure
56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly)) ([Chapters
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/), [13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/), and
[14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)), and their O-GalNAc glycans tend to be located in
similar regions and protein sites as O-Man glycans in yeast. This means that
expression of human O-glycoproteins in yeast may result in O-mannosylation at
sites that carry O-GalNAc in mammals. Examples of this include the hinge
region of IgA and mucin sequences. Because it is still difficult to predict
types of O-glycosylation, human proteins expressed in yeast must be tested to
determine if they are O-mannosylated.

Human O-GalNAc glycans have been successfully engineered into yeast by
introducing human protein GalNAc transferases along with UDP-Glc/GlcNAc
C4-epimerase and a UDP-Gal/GalNAc Golgi transporter. The entire biosynthetic
machinery for CMP-Neu5Ac synthesis and transport has also been introduced
together with a human sialyltransferase, and sialylated O-glycans have been
produced in yeast. The problem with competing endogenous O-mannosylation can
be partly eliminated by including a mannosyltransferase inhibitor
(rhodanine-3-acetic acid). A deeper understanding of the yeast O-Man and human
O-GalNAc glycosylation pathways is needed to provide new strategies to
circumvent competition between the two systems and enhance O-glycan
engineering in yeast.

Plants offer a simpler starting point than yeast for N-glycan humanization
because the predominant native N-glycans of plants are paucimannose
(Man3GlcNAc2) and biantennary terminating in GlcNAc (GlcNAc2Man3GlcNAc2). The
abundance of paucimannose N-glycans appears to be due to a β-hexosaminidase
that removes attached GlcNAc residues in competition with GlcNAc-transferases,
a feature also found in insect cells. Two plant-specific N-glycan
modifications include core α1-3-Fuc (instead of mammalian core α1-6-Fuc) and
β1-2-Xyl linked to the β-Man in the N-glycan core. Both modifications are
potentially immunogenic in humans. Plants also produce unique types of
O-glycosylation not found in other species that pose potential problems for
the generation of therapeutic glycoproteins.

Great advances in engineering plants for human-like N-glycosylation have been
achieved. Knockdown or knockout of the β-hexosaminidase that inhibits complex
N-glycan formation, as well as the α1-3-fucosyltransferase and
β1-2-xylosyltransferase, have been achieved in different plants, including
_Arabidopsis thaliana_ and _Nicotiana benthamiana_. Nearly homogeneous
biantennary GlcNAc2Man3GlcNAc2 N-glycans were produced. These were further
engineered by the introduction of Gal (using _B4GALT1_ ) and sialic acid
(using _ST6GAL1_ along with the enzymes needed to synthesize and transport
CMP-Neu5Ac) in an engineering design using up to six gene constructs. Such
humanized plants produced α2-6-Neu5Ac capped biantennary N-glycans without
core fucose on a variety of recombinant glycoproteins. These achievements
depended on combinatorial screening strategies to identify appropriate
chimeric constructs of exogenous enzymes to drive the engineered glycosylation
toward homogeneity.

Glycoproteins produced in plants carrying native paucimannose N-glycosylation
are already in use as approved drugs. For enzyme replacement therapy, the
terminal mannose N-glycans of glucocerebrosidase (taliglucerase alfa) produced
in carrots is beneficial for targeting to endogenous human mannose receptors,
despite α1-3-Fuc and β1-2-Xyl modifications, and is in clinical use. Moreover,
glycoengineered _Nicotiana bethamiana_ cells without α1-3-Fuc and β1-2-Xyl
have been used to produce a triple antibody cocktail used to treat Ebola virus
infections.

Plants do not have the types of O-glycosylation found in other eukaryotes, but
produce extensins and arabinogalactan proteins with two unique O-glycans. A
family of prolyl-4-hydroxylases (P4H) converts selected Pro residues to
hydroxyproline that may be arabinosylated by a series of enzymes. In addition,
Ser residues may be O-glycosylated by the addition of Gal residues. Although a
number of the P4Hs and glycosyltransferases have been knocked out in different
plants, it is unclear whether these modifications can be completely eliminated
without affecting viability. Nonetheless, the human machinery for O-GalNAc
glycosylation has been engineered into plants. Similar to bacteria and yeast,
this involves introducing an UDP-Glc/GlcNAc C4-epimerase as well as the
necessary polypeptide GalNAc transferases, but a dedicated UDP-GalNAc
transporter is not required. Human core 1 glycosylation, as well as the
complete sialylation machinery with a ST3GALI sialyltransferase have also been
successfully introduced in plants. If issues related to hydroxyproline can be
resolved, plants offer a valuable system in which different types of mammalian
O-glycosylation can be engineered and exploited. A clear highlight of
glycoengineering in plants is the combined introduction of 14 genes for
production of the major human therapeutic glycoprotein erythropoietin with
human sialylated biantennary N-glycans and core 1 O-glycans in tobacco cells
([Table 56.1](/books/NBK453027/table/CH56TB1/?report=objectonly)).

Engineering in insect cells involves multiple strategies. Two different
platforms are generally used for recombinant expression of proteins—transient
expression in baculovirus and stable expression in S2 _Drosophila
melanogaster_ cells. For the baculovirus expression platform, glycoengineering
may be achieved by including glycosylation genes with the recombinant
baculovirus vector, or introduced in the insect cell line used for infection
and expression. Stable engineering of host insect cell lines may be the most
efficient and consistent strategy, but remarkable success has been achieved by
incorporating up to nine glycogenes in a baculovirus vector ([Table
56.1](/books/NBK453027/table/CH56TB1/?report=objectonly)). Nevertheless, it is
anticipated that only stable engineering of the host cells will eventually
enable efficient production of homogeneous glycoforms.

Insect cells produce mostly paucimannose N-glycans despite their enzymatic
ability to produce complex galactosylated N-glycans ([Figure
56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly)). This is primarily
due to a highly efficient β-hexosaminidase, FDL, which removes attached GlcNAc
residues from the α1-3-Man branch, but it is probably also because insect
cells appear to express low _MGAT2_ activity. Like plants, insects also add
the potential immunogenic core α1-3–Fuc and do not typically perform
sialylation. This has been addressed by introducing sialic acid synthase, CMP-
sialic acid synthase, and an _N_ -acetylglucosamine-6-phosphate 2′-epimerase
into insect cells. For efficient sialylation, a dedicated CMP-sialic acid
transporter appears to be needed as well. Using different strategies,
production of glycoproteins carrying biantennary N-glycans with
galactosylation and sialic acid capping has been achieved. However, RNAi
silencing strategies targeting FDL and the α1-3-fucosyltransferase have been
somewhat ineffective, and efficient formation of complex N-glycans has not yet
been achieved. Recently, precision gene editing was used to knock out FDL in
Sf9 cells, showing the usage of this technology for insect cell engineering.

Insect cells perform the same range of O-glycosylation as mammalian cells
([Figure 56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly)), although
the extent to which O-GalNAc glycans are attached at the same sites as in
mammals is unexplored. Moreover, the degree of processing of O-glycans appears
incomplete, at least using baculovirus expression. Although insect cells
appear to offer a straightforward host for production of glycoproteins with
human O-glycans, little has been investigated in this regard.

The cores of all types of glycoprotein glycans ([Figure
56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly)) are highly
conserved among mammals, although there are terminal glycan variations
([Chapter 14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/)). The most popular mammalian cell line
used for glycoengineering is the CHO cell line established >50 years ago. The
success of the CHO cell line is partly due to the ease with which
glycosylation mutants could be isolated ([Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)),
and it was the first cell used to manufacture a recombinant therapeutic with
relatively simple human-type terminal glycans without expression of antigenic
nonhuman glycans or unusual modifications of the glycans. As discussed in
[Chapter 49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/), the CHO cell line has an important place
in glycoengineering history, exemplified by the Lec mutant lines generated by
lectin selection. These cell lines with distinct mutations in glycosylation
genes have provided tools for the scientific community for more than three
decades, and illustrated the importance of access to recombinant proteins with
particular glycoforms for discovery of biological functions of glycans. CHO
cells can be considered as [Glycobiology](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/glycobiology/)'s gift to Biopharma.

Major successes have been achieved in engineering CHO and other mammalian cell
lines for production of human therapeutics ([Table
56.1](/books/NBK453027/table/CH56TB1/?report=objectonly) and [Chapters
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/) and [57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)). The field is,
however, undergoing a revolution with the new methods for facile, targeted,
precise gene editing that allow the design of almost any conceivable
glycosylation capacity in any mammalian cell by combining knockout and knockin
events.

The first major feat in gene editing of mammalian cells was elimination of the
core α1-6-Fuc for production of recombinant IgG antibodies with enhanced
binding to the Fcγ-IIIa receptor ([Table
56.1](/books/NBK453027/table/CH56TB1/?report=objectonly)). Overexpression of
bisecting GlcNAcT-III ( _MGAT3_ ) resulted in stable CHO cells with highly
limited capacity for core fucosylation (commercialized by Roche). A second
strategy involved a tour-de-force approach using homologous recombination to
knock out the two _FUT8_ alleles in CHO cells. More than 10,000 CHO clones
were screened to identify the final knockout cell (commercialized by BioWa).
Although this was an impressive achievement, such laborious random selection
limits options for selecting cell clones that retain the attributes needed for
optimal bioprocessing. Using precise gene editing the same engineering was
rapidly replicated, providing ample clones for selection of those with optimal
properties. Glycoengineered CHO lines optimized for antibody production are
now commercially available (Potelligent CHOK1SV, Lonza/BioWa).

Engineering N-glycan sialylation has been another focus in the field. CHO
cells produce only α2-3-linked sialic acids on N-glycans, whereas human
HEK293-T cells (for example) produce a mixture of α2-3- and α2-6-linked sialic
acids. Most soluble glycoproteins in human blood (including IgG) have
α2-6-linked sialic acids on N-glycans, and reports have suggested that the
sialic acid linkage may influence immunomodulatory functions as well as
circulatory half-life. It has therefore been of interest to engineer more
homogeneous α2-6-sialylation in cells. These efforts have mainly been limited
to overexpression of α2-6-siayltransferases to override endogenous
α2-3-sialylation with variable results, illustrating the complexity of
engineering glycosylation in cells with competing pathways.

An innovative glycoengineering strategy (GlycoDelete) reduced the inherent
heterogeneity of mammalian N-glycan structures. Human HEK293-T cells lacking
_MGAT1_ were stably transfected to express a fungal endo-N-
acetylglucosaminidase (EndoT) that efficiently truncated N-glycans to a single
GlcNAc, which was an acceptor for galactosylation and sialylation. Recombinant
antibodies with truncated N-glycans had lower affinity for Fcγ receptors,
suggesting that this glycoengineering strategy may be suitable for use with
neutralizing antibodies.

More recently, a fairly complete deconstruction of the N-glycosylation pathway
in CHO cells was performed by precise gene editing to knock out 19
glycosyltransferases, including all four α2-3-sialyltransferases that function
on N-glycans ([Figure
56.3](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f3/?report=objectonly)). Combining knockout
of _St3gal4_ and _St3gal6_ with site-specific knockin of one copy of _St6gal1_
resulted in homogeneous α2-6-sialylation. Combining combinatorial knockout of
all isoenzymes in N-glycan sialylation, galactosylation/LacNAc formation,
branching, and core fucosylation has provided a design matrix for improving
the homogeneity of N-glycans in CHO cells. A combination of five gene
knockouts and the knockin of _St6gal1_ created the glycoprotein therapeutic
erythropoietin having homogeneous biantennary N-glycans with terminal
α2-6-NeuAc. Although this was an essentially impossible task until recent
precise gene editing advances, the strategy can now be applied to any
mammalian cell to develop panels of isogenic cell clones with distinct
capacities for N-glycosylation.

Therapeutic glycoprotein production still suffers from heterogeneity,
including variations in which Asn residues are glycosylated (site-occupancy,
macroheterogeneity) and/or the diversity of mature glycan structures at any
one site (microheterogeneity). This is currently addressed by ensuring
reproducibility in batch-to-batch production through the use of highly
standardized bioprocessing protocols, but this strategy is far from optimal.
For example, incompletely sialylated therapeutic glycoproteins may be cleared
by the hepatic asialoglycoprotein receptor (Ashwell–Morell receptor),
resulting in inconsistent circulatory half-lives of therapeutic glycoproteins.
Considerable efforts have been devoted to improving sialylation by
overexpressing relevant sialyltransferases as well as inhibiting or knocking
out endogenous sialidases in host cells. Protein-specific glycosylation
patterns and heterogeneity are more difficult to control.

Nonhuman mammalian cell lines can produce two immunogenic nonhuman glycans:
α1-3-Gal added to [_N_ -acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nacetyllactosamine/) and Neu5Gc added to Gal or GalNAc ([Chapters
14](/books/n/glyco3/ch14/) and [15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). The
α1-3-galactosyltransferase and CMP- _N_ -acetylneuraminic acid hydrolase genes
responsible are inactive in humans. Although α1-3-Gal and Neu5Gc are not
produced in CHO cells, both genes have been knocked out as a precaution. Even
so, Neu5Gc scavenged from animal glycoproteins used in cell culture can appear
in expressed glycoproteins, so use of defined media without nonhuman
glycoproteins is also necessary. In engineering mammalian cell lines, it is
important to consider that the glycosylation capacity is driven by the
expression of a subset of available enzyme genes, but unexpressed genes can
become activated. Thus, cell line–specific glycosylation features are
generally controlled by transcriptional regulation rather than mutations or
gene aberrations. Analysis of all known glycosylation genes in five distinct
CHO production cell lines derived from the original CHO-K1 cell line found no
apparent deleterious mutations or loss of genes, despite severe chromosomal
alterations. This suggests that one must consider all the known glycogenes in
a mammalian cell line for glycoengineering strategies.

Engineering the glycosylation capacity of CHO cells has also enabled more
homogeneous bioconjugation of therapeutic drugs. For example, therapeutic
drugs may be chemically conjugated with PEG chains to enhance circulatory
half-life, but chemical conjugation is difficult to direct to specific sites
in glycoproteins. A strategy for enzymatic modification of glycans
postproduction has been developed that involves desialylation of recombinant
glycoproteins, followed by in vitro transfer of a modified (PEGylated) Neu5Ac
(as its CMP analog) to exposed Gal/GalNAc residues by a sialyltransferase. The
process is in use with approved drugs, although heterogeneous modifications
occur when multiantennary N-glycans are targeted. CHO cells have now been
engineered to produce monoantennary, unsialylated N-glycans, which circumvent
heterogeneity while retaining multiple exposed Gal acceptor sites for sialo-
PEGylation.

Mammalian cells perform many different types of O-glycosylation ([Figure
56.1](/books/NBK453027/figure/ch56.f1/?report=objectonly)), and although these
exert diverse and important biological functions, the interest in O-glycans
for recombinant therapeutics has been limited. Nevertheless, recombinant
coagulation factors in clinical use carry O-GalNAc, O-Fuc, and/or O-Glc
glycans, and many other approved drugs including erythropoietin and Enbrel
have O-GalNAc glycans. O-glycans are also used for site-specific
bioconjugation.

Engineering O-GalNAc glycans involves a new level of complexity because up to
20 isoenzymes (polypeptide GalNAc-transferases) direct the initiation of
O-GalNAc glycans. It may therefore be important to consider the repertoire of
these enzymes in a cell line. In theory, a protein that is naturally found
with an O-glycan may not be O-glycosylated when expressed in a specific
production cell line, and vice versa. Although few examples of this have been
identified, an illuminating case is the important phosphaturic factor FGF23, a
potential drug for patients with a congenital deficiency associated with
hyperphosphatemia which requires an [O-GalNAc glycan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/ogalnacglycan/) for activity.

[Glycoengineering](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycoengineering/) of cell
lines has vast potential to address a number of unmet needs in the
glycosciences. As already mentioned, the CHO Lec, Ldl, Pgs, and Pig mutant
cell lines ([Chapters 12](/books/n/glyco3/ch12/) and
[49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)) have served the research community for decades by
providing defined alterations in glycosylation that enable studies of the
functional roles of N-glycans, sialylation, fucosylation, O-glycosylation,
proteoglycans, and GPI-anchored proteins. CHO and HEK293-T mutant cells with
MGAT1 deficiency have been widely used to produce recombinant proteins with
homogeneous N-glycans suitable for crystallization studies.

Targeted gene editing of whole organisms has provided immense insight into the
importance of glycosylation and has revealed biological functions of specific
glycosylation genes ([Chapter 41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)). However, discovery
of distinct biological functions of specific glycans, and the molecular
mechanism(s) involved in multicellular organisms, is complicated by cell-type
regulation of glycosylation and the cellular heterogeneity of tissues. Cell
lines help to answer certain specific questions and complement whole organism
studies.

Precise gene editing provides vast opportunities for glycoengineering cell
lines and designing new strategies to probe glycan functions. Truncation of
O-glycan elongation was used to produce homogeneous simple O-glycoproteomes
(SimpleCell strategy), which enabled enrichment and sensitive mapping of the
O-GalNAc and O-Man glycoproteomes of human cell lines. The development of
isogenic cell lines differing in only one glycosyltransferase gene allows
comparative studies to explore the function of a particular glycan or
glycosylation pathway. This strategy was used to show that truncation of
O-GalNAc glycans by targeting of the COSMC chaperone ([Chapter
10](/books/n/glyco3/ch10/)) induced oncogenic features (proliferation, growth,
and invasive behavior) of human nontransformed keratinocytes, an interesting
finding in light of the frequent overexpression of truncated O-glycans (Tn,
STn) in cancer.

A related approach is to use glycoengineering for discovery of host glycans
required for microbial and viral infectivity. In one remarkable study using
binding of Lassa virus to a haploid cell line, the large number of the
glycogenes required for synthesis of the extended O-Man glycans that support
Lassa virus binding were identified and validated using a combination of
selection for virus resistance and TALEN-mediated gene knockout.

[Glycoengineering](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycoengineering/) of cells is
entering a phase that may be described as “LEGO toying” due to the efficiency
of precise gene editing. Entire glycosylation machineries can be deconstructed
and rebuilt in various cell types. Cells show remarkable plasticity for
engineering glycosylation pathways, with only a few glycosylation enzymes
essential for cell growth in vitro. The essential functions for viability of
mammalian cells are initial N-glycosylation ([Chapter
9](/books/n/glyco3/ch9/)) and nuclear/cytosolic O-GlcNAc modifications
([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). These aside, we can envision that all
glycosylation pathways in cells will be genetically deconstructed, and the
roles of the genes determined. Combining engineering of glycosylation pathways
in creative ways by introducing completely foreign enzymes can be used to
produce novel glycans for study.

Large-scale glycosylation screening and discovery strategies are also
possible. The CRISPR/Cas9 editing tool is particularly suited for multiplexed
screening strategies, and whole-genome lentiviral-based knockout libraries
have already been applied for screening mutations that result in altered
biological function. Although knockdown strategies have been successful for
screening biological functions of glycogenes in multiple organisms (worms,
flies, frogs, and zebrafish), these have generally not been effective in
mammalian cells due to low efficiency of knockdown. It is now possible to
apply whole-glycogenome screening strategies in cell lines to probe and
dissect the roles of glycosylation. These tools will dramatically improve the
options for dissection of structure–function relationships in the field. The
power of genetic deconvolution of an entire glycosylation pathway required for
a biological function with a knockout screening strategy has already been
shown with the Lassa virus study described above.

Glycoengineered cell lines and validated targeting constructs (knockout,
knockin, and mutated) including libraries for screening will become important
community resources that will advance the glycoscience field and help
disseminate and integrate glycosciences more broadly in biology. It is
possible to generate large libraries of cells with subtly different
glycosylation. We can envision libraries with a combinatorial set of the 200+
identified mammalian glycosyltransferases that could serve as a platform for
producing distinct glycoforms of any glycoconjugate, or as cell-based arrays
displaying distinct glycoconjugates.

One word of caution should be raised: whereas glycoengineering by knockout is
fairly straightforward, there is considerably more work needed to establish
methods to build robust complex glycosylation capabilities requiring multiple
gene insertions in cells. Nevertheless, we may envision large libraries of
cells with different glycosylation capacities, including novel ones. Gene
editing technologies have started a revolution in the glycoscience field, and
we have only begun to see the new possibilities for manipulating glycosylation
in cells and organisms, and exploiting glycoengineering in therapeutic
glycoproteins and biologics

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Di Wu,
Christopher Seaui, Benjamin Schulz, and Benjamin Schumann.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.057

Several classes of successful commercial products are based on isolated or
synthetic glycans. This chapter summarizes the use of glycans as vaccines and
therapeutics. Applications of glycan mimics as drugs are also discussed.

Many well-known small-molecule drugs, such as antibiotics and anticancer
therapeutic agents, are natural products that contain glycans as part of their
core structure and/or as a sugar side chain (i.e., a glycoside). Some examples
of natural products that bear glycan side chains are shown in [Figure
57.1](/books/NBK453070/figure/ch57.f1/?report=objectonly). The well-
established area of natural product chemistry will not be reviewed in detail
here. Modified glycans gave rise to synthetic drugs such as small-molecule
inhibitors of influenza virus neuraminidase (see also [Chapter
55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)). Recent advances in the functional understanding
of carbohydrate–protein interactions have enabled the development of
glycomimetics, a new class of small-molecule drugs that are briefly described.

Influenza virus has two major surface proteins, hemagglutinin and
neuraminidase (see [Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)). The hemagglutinin
initiates infection by binding to cell-surface sialic acids. The neuraminidase
assists virus release by cleaving sialic acids to prevent unwanted retention
of newly synthesized virus on the cell surface.
[Neuraminidase](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/neuraminidase/) may also function
during the invasion phase by removing sialic acids on soluble mucins that
would otherwise inhibit cell-surface binding. Because neuraminidase is
essential to the viral life cycle, based on the crystal structure of the
enzyme a rational drug design program yielded Zanamivir (Relenza). The
addition of a bulky guanidino side chain at C-4 of a previously known
neuraminidase inhibitor, 2-deoxy-2,3-dehydro- _N_ -acetyl-neuraminic acid
(DANA), markedly increased the affinity for influenza neuraminidase, without
affecting host-cell neuraminidases ([Figure
57.2](/books/NBK453070/figure/ch57.f2/?report=objectonly); see also [Chapter
55](/books/n/glyco3/ch55/)). Relenza blocks the influenza virus life cycle by
preventing infection and by interrupting the spread of the virus during the
early phase of an infection. Due to poor oral availability, Relenza has to be
inhaled to work at the mucosal sites of infection in the upper airway. The
orally available drug Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) achieves the same effects and has
taken over most of the market due to the ease of use. The fear of avian
influenza virus (“bird flu”) spreading into human populations has prompted
stockpiling of Tamiflu. Fortunately, widespread use of the drug has not become
necessary to date. The development of Tamiflu is a textbook example for
rational drug design resulting in a powerful drug against a devastating
disease.

Most biotherapeutic products are glycoproteins and include erythropoietin as
well as various other cytokines, antibodies, glycosyltransferases, and
glycosidases. This class of molecules sells in the tens of billions of U.S.
dollars per year worldwide. Therapeutic glycoproteins are typically produced
as recombinantly in cell culture systems or, less commonly, in the milk of
transgenic animals. Control of glycosylation is of major importance during the
development of these drugs, because their glycan chains have marked effects on
stability, activity, antigenicity, and pharmacodynamics in intact organisms.
In most cases, glycosylation must be optimized to ensure prolonged circulatory
half-life in the blood. Manipulation of glycans to promote targeting to
specific tissues and cell types has also been a useful element of drug design.

[Erythropoietin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/erythropoietin/) (EPO) is the
most successful biotechnology product to date. It is a circulating cytokine
that binds to the erythropoietin receptor, inducing proliferation and
differentiation of erythroid progenitors in the bone marrow. EPO was developed
to treat anemias caused by bone marrow suppression after chemotherapy or lack
of erythropoietin (e.g., renal failure). Natural and recombinant forms of
erythropoietin carry three sialylated complex N-glycans and one sialylated
O-glycan. Although in vitro the activity of deglycosylated erythropoietin is
comparable to that of the fully glycosylated molecule, its activity in vivo is
reduced by ∼90%, because poorly glycosylated erythropoietin is rapidly cleared
by filtration in the kidney. Undersialylated erythropoietin is also rapidly
cleared by galactose receptors in hepatocytes and macrophages (see [Chapter
31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)). Fully sialylated chains and increased tetra-
antennary branching reduces these problems and increases EPO activity in vivo
nearly 10-fold. Addition of an N-glycosylation site also increases half-life
and activity in vivo. Covalently linking polyethylene glycol to the protein
also reduces clearance by the kidney.

[Erythropoietin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/erythropoietin/) is unusual
because it is small enough to be cleared by the kidney if it is
underglycosylated. For most glycoprotein therapeutics, a more important
consideration is minimizing clearance by galactose-binding hepatic receptors
by ensuring full sialylation of glycans. Because glycans greatly influence the
efficacy of these drugs, control over glycosylation during production is very
important in light of regulatory requirements for batch-to-batch product
consistency. Changes in culture pH, the availability of precursors and
nutrients, and the presence or absence of various growth factors and hormones
can each affect the extent of glycosylation, the degree of branching, and the
completeness of sialylation. Sialidases and other glycosidases that are either
secreted or released by dead cells can also cause degradation of the
previously intact product in the culture medium. These issues were hotly
debated in recent years with the advent of “biosimilars” or generic versions
of glycoproteins. The need to proof composition has fueled efforts devoted to
glycan analysis and sequencing.

Patenting of new therapeutics is typically based on the composition of matter
in the claimed molecule. Small molecules of defined structure and
nonglycosylated proteins are easily captured in this manner. However,
glycoproteins, especially those with multiple glycosylation sites, render it
virtually impossible to obtain preparations that contain only a single
glycoform. Thus, most biotherapeutic glycoproteins consist of a mixture of
glycoforms. Licensing bodies allow for a certain range of variation in
glycoforms and the complexity of the mixture. However, the manufacturer and
the agency must agree on the extent such variation is acceptable for a given
drug formulation. Biopharmaceutical companies therefore spend considerable
effort in assuring that their products fall within these defined ranges, once
these are approved by licensing bodies. The inherent difficulty in reproducing
complex glycoform mixtures also complicates efforts to make generic forms of
recombinant glycoprotein drugs. Given the complexities of producing
glycotherapeutic agents in mammalian cells, even the smallest changes in
growth conditions can have significant effects on the range of glycoforms
found in any given product batch. The licensing agencies use consistency in
glycoform composition as an indirect measure of the quality of process control
in production. Differences in glycosylation can have implications for the
patentability of agents in which the polypeptide remains constant. Marked
differences in glycosylation have been used to define agents as being uniquely
different. However, it is usually necessary to show that the differences in
glycosylation being claimed also have a significant effect in changing the
functionality of the drug in question. The associated pharmaceutical licensing
and legal issues are rapidly evolving to keep pace with scientific advances in
this area.

There are limits as to how much of a biotherapeutic glycoprotein an animal
cell line can produce. Production becomes an issue in cases in which very
large amounts of a particular glycoprotein is needed.
[Glycoprotein](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycoprotein/) production in
plants or yeast is attractive but makes it necessary to eliminate risks
arising from the nonhuman glycans of plant and fungal cells that could cause
excessively rapid clearance and/or antigenic reactions. Many plant and yeast
glycans are immunogenic and elicit glycan-specific IgE and IgG antibodies in
humans when delivered parenterally. A variety of mammalian genes have been
added back into yeast and/or genes that are producing nonhuman glycosylation
have been eliminated. Extensively engineered yeast strains are capable of
producing biantennary N-linked glycans with the human sialic acid _N_
-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) but the productivity of such yeast strains are
often low. Efforts to engineer yeast to make human-like O-glycans are under
way, but glycosaminoglycans have not yet been addressed.

Plants and algae have also been used to engineer recombinant glycoproteins,
but, as in yeast, the glycans produced by plants differ from those found in
vertebrates. The antigenic differences that arise in recombinant glycoproteins
produced in plants become less problematic if used for topical or oral
administration, because humans are normally exposed to plant glycans in the
diet. The cost of production is much lower than in animal cell culture systems
and animal sera are not needed. As in yeast, “humanizing plants” with respect
to glycosylation may allow the production of nonimmunogenic glycoproteins.
Chemical methods for synthesizing entire glycoproteins from scratch have been
developed and single glycoforms of EPO have been prepared by total synthesis.
Given the complexity of glycoprotein synthesis, scale up of these processes is
challenging and an area of intense research activity (see [Chapter
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)).

All monosaccharides needed for cellular glycan synthesis can be obtained from
glucose through metabolic interconversions (see [Chapter
4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)). Alternatively, monosaccharides can be derived from
the diet or salvaged from degraded glycans. The relative contributions of
different sources can vary with the cell type. For instance, even though all
mammalian cells use sialic acid, only some contain high amounts of UDP-GlcNAc
epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE), which is required for the de novo
synthesis of CMP-sialic acid. But sialic acid salvage from degraded glycans is
quite efficient, decreasing the demand on the de novo pathway. Similarly,
galactose, fucose, mannose, _N_ -acetylglucosamine, and _N_
-acetylgalactosamine can come from the diet or be salvaged for glycan
synthesis, whereas glucuronic acid (GlcA), iduronic acid (IdoA), and xylose
cannot. All monosaccharides derived from the diet or degraded glycans can be
catabolized for energy, and again, cells vary in their reliance on the
different pathways.

The variable contributions of these pathways are important for therapy of some
diseases. For instance, patients with congenital disorder of glycosylation
type Ib (CDG-Ib), who are deficient in phosphomannose isomerase, benefit
greatly from oral mannose supplementation to bypass the insufficient supply of
glucose-derived mannose-6-phosphate. A few CDG-IIc patients have been treated
with fucose to restore synthesis of sialyl Lewis x on leukocytes (see [Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)). Some patients with Crohn's disease show clinical
improvement with oral _N_ -acetylglucosamine supplementation, but the
mechanism is unknown. Mice deficient in GNE activity have kidney failure, but
providing _N_ -acetylmannosamine in the diet prevents this outcome. Clinical
trials using _N_ -acetylmannosamine to treat GNE-deficient patients with
hereditary inclusion body myopathy type II (HIBM-II) have been conducted but
have yielded inconclusive results.

Some monosaccharides and disaccharides can be toxic to humans who lack
specific enzymes. For example, people who lack fructoaldolase (aldolase B)
accumulate fructose-1-phosphate, which ultimately causes ATP depletion and
disrupts glycogen metabolism. Prolonged fructose exposure in these people can
be fatal, and fructose-limited diets are critical. Deficiencies in the ability
to metabolize galactose (see [Chapter 4](/books/n/glyco3/ch4/)) are mostly due
to a severe reduction in galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase activity and
cause galactosemia. Although these patients are asymptomatic at birth,
ingesting milk leads to vomiting and diarrhea, cataracts, hepatomegaly, and
even neonatal death. Low-galactose or galactose-free diets can prevent these
life-threatening symptoms. However, even these diets do not prevent
unexplained long-term complications, which include speech and learning
disabilities and ovarian failure in females with galactosemia.

Infants hydrolyze lactose (Galβ1-4Glc) quite well, but the level of intestinal
lactase can be much lower or absent in adults because of down-regulation of
lactase gene expression. About two-thirds of the human population has lactase
nonpersistence, making milk products a dietary annoyance. Unabsorbed lactose
provides an osmotic load and is metabolized by colonic bacteria, causing
diarrhea, abdominal bloating, flatulence, and nausea. Lactase persistence has
evolved in certain pastoral populations from northwestern Europe, India, and
Africa, allowing milk consumption in adult life. However, many adults either
avoid lactose-containing foods or use lactase tablets to improve lactose
digestion.

The failure to turn over glycans by lysosomal degradation causes serious
problems for patients with lysosomal storage disorders. Deficiencies in
individual lysosomal enzymes lead to pathological accumulation of their
substrates in inclusion bodies inside the cells (see [Chapter
41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)). One approach to treating these disorders is to
inhibit initial glycan synthesis, a strategy termed substrate reduction
therapy (SRT). Reduced synthesis of the initial compound decreases the load on
the impaired enzyme, and some patients show significant clinical improvement.
A small molecule drug used for SRT is _N_ -butyldeoxynojirimycin (or _N_
-butyl-DNJ) (Miglustat, Zavesca), that was approved in 2002 for treatment of
Gaucher's disease (glucocerebrosidase deficiency).

Another approach for treating lysosomal storage disorders is enzyme
replacement therapy (ERT). Unlike most therapeutic glycoproteins that interact
with target receptors on the surface of cells, lysosomal enzymes developed for
replacement therapy must be delivered intracellularly to lysosomes, their site
of action. During the normal biosynthesis of lysosomal enzymes, their
N-glycans become modified with mannose-6-phosphate (Man-6-P) residues, which
target them to lysosomes using Man-6-P receptors (see [Chapter
30](/books/n/glyco3/ch30/)). The challenge for ERT is to get the enzymes
targeted properly to lysosomes, where they can degrade accumulated substrate.
ERT for Gaucher's disease targets the lysosomes of macrophages via the cell-
surface mannose receptor (see [Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)). The four
recombinant enzyme products Imiglucerase (approved in 1995), Velaglucerase
(approved in 2010), Taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso, approved in 2012), and
Eliglustat (Cerdelga, approved in 2014) are marketed.

The success of glucocerebrosidase treatment stimulated the development of
lysosomal enzymes for treatment of other lysosomal storage diseases such as
Fabry's disease, mucopolysaccharidoses type I, II, and VI, and Pompe's
disease. The replacement therapies clearly have beneficial effects and prolong
life but are extremely expensive.

A third approach for treating lysosomal storage disorders takes advantage of
the fact that some genetic defects lead to misfolding of the encoded enzyme in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Low-molecular-weight (LMW) competitive
inhibitors of some of these enzymes can act as “chaperones” that stabilize the
folded enzyme in the ER and effectively rescue the mutation and increase the
steady-state concentration of active enzyme in the lysosome. The dose of the
inhibitor must be carefully adjusted to ensure that the inhibitory effects on
enzyme function do not overshadow beneficial effects on folding. Only a low
level of enzyme restoration is needed to significantly reduce the accumulation
of undigested glycan substrates, indicating that lysosomal hydrolases are
normally present in large catalytic excess.

The use of purified glycans as therapeutics has received less attention than
the development of glycoprotein-based treatments. Difficulties in establishing
structure–activity relationships due to the large number of chiral centers and
functional groups, undesirable pharmacokinetics of available formulations,
poor oral absorption of the compounds, and low-affinity interactions with drug
targets have limited their development. Some successful glycan drugs, such as
the anticoagulant heparin, are given by injection, although efforts are under
way to convert heparin into an orally absorbable form by complexing it with
positively charged molecules. It may be possible to deliver other hydrophilic
and/or negatively charged glycan drugs in this way to allow penetration of the
intestinal barrier. Glycans are also sometimes attached to hydrophobic drugs
to improve their solubility and alter their pharmacokinetics.

The anticoagulant heparin is, as discussed in [Chapters
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/) and [43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/), one of the most
widely prescribed drugs today. [Heparin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/heparin/) binds and activates antithrombin, a protease inhibitor of the
coagulation cascade. Antithrombin activation leads to rapid inhibition of
thrombin and factor Xa, shutting down the production of fibrin clots. Billions
of doses of heparin (several metric tons) is produced by autodigestion of pig
intestines, followed by graded fractionation of the products. Unfractionated
heparin produces a variable anticoagulant response as it also binds to several
plasma, platelet, and endothelial proteins. LMW heparins are derived by
chemical or enzymatic cleavage of heparin to form smaller fragments. The
pharmacological properties and the relative efficacy of the various LMW
heparins are superior to those of unfractionated heparin and fewer secondary
complications are reported. LMW heparins have replaced unfractionated heparins
as therapeutic of choice in virtually all developed countries. In price-
sensitive markets the unfractionated products are still heavily used. The
preparation of recombinant heparin based on heparin biosynthesis enzymes is
still under development. [Arixtra](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/arixtra/), a
synthetic heparin pentasaccharide that binds antithrombin exactly as isolated
heparin is used to prevent deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism and has
gained market share in recent years. Still, the higher cost of the synthetic
drug Arixtra has prevented an even larger success therapeutic.

To prevent excessive bleeding, rapid neutralization of heparin is desirable.
Administration of the basic protein protamine, which binds to heparin,
neutralizes its activity, and results in clearance of the complex by the
kidney and liver. [Heparin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/heparin/) is also
used to treat protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), likely working by competing
for proinflammatory heparin-binding cytokines that trigger PLE in susceptible
patients (see [Chapter 43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)).

[Hyaluronan](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/hyaluronan/) (see [Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) is a naturally occurring glycosaminoglycan that is
extensively used in surgical applications. Because of its viscoelastic
properties, hyaluronan has lubricating and cushioning properties that have
made it useful for protecting the corneal endothelium during ocular surgery.
Hyaluronan has antiadhesive properties and is useful in postsurgical wound
healing. The mechanism of action is not well understood, but it may involve
hyaluronan-binding proteins that mediate cell adhesion (see [Chapter
15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)). Intra-articular injections of hyaluronan are used
to treat knee and hip osteoarthritis. Modest improvement in patients treated
with hyaluronan, may be the result of a mechanical (as a viscosupplement)
and/or a biological (via signaling pathways) effect. Hyaluronan is used in
very large quantities as a tissue filler in cosmetic medicine.

“Glyconutrient” is a term used by the nutritional supplement industry to
describe some of their products with wide-ranging claims concerning potential
benefits. In most cases, these claims have not been substantiated through
placebo-controlled, double-blind trials with defined, quantifiable outcomes.
Much work is needed in this area to obtain insight into the potential role of
dietary glycans on human health and to help consumers make wise decisions
regarding their use. Mixtures of plant polysaccharides such as larchbark
arabinogalactan and glucomannan are often termed “glyconutrients” that are
claimed to contain “essential monosaccharides” needed for “cell
communication.” Because all monosaccharides can be made from glucose (except
in patients with rare genetic deficiencies; see [Chapter
42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)), none of the other monosaccharides are actually
known to be “essential.” Moreover, these polysaccharides are not degraded to
available monosaccharides in the stomach or small intestine. Instead,
anaerobic bacteria in the colon metabolize them and produce short-chain fatty
acids. No peer-reviewed clinical studies support the efficacy of such
“glyconutrients” for any disease or condition. Nevertheless, the following
examples show how dietary glycans might have beneficial effects.

Glucosamine (often mixed with chondroitin sulfate [CS]) has been promoted to
relieve symptoms of osteoarthritis, which involves the age-dependent erosion
of articular cartilage. Cartilage provides a cushion between the bones to
minimize mechanical damage, and a net loss of cartilage occurs when the
degradation rate exceeds the synthetic rate. A number of clinical trials
report that glucosamine improves osteoarthritis symptoms, and some claim to
restore partially the structure of the eroded cushion, in particular in the
knees. Superficially, this would seem to make sense, because primary glycans
of cartilage include hyaluronan (see [Chapter 15](/books/n/glyco3/ch15/)) and
CS, both of which contain hexosamines within their structure (see [Chapter
16](/books/n/glyco3/ch16/)). Conflicting reports suggest that the outcome may
depend on study design and the type and source of material. Nevertheless,
veterinarians report positive results after treating animals with glucosamine
for more than two decades. Double-blind, placebo-controlled studies in humans
have shown a decreased rate of joint space narrowing. Glucosamine might also
alter UDP-GlcNAc and potentially UDP-GalNAc levels, thus affecting cellular
responses involving major classes of glycans.

Positive effects of CS on osteoarthritis are less well-documented. It remains
unclear how the acidic CS polymer can be absorbed and delivered to its
proposed site of action. Further studies are needed to determine whether CSs
are absorbed by the target tissue, and if they actually lead to changes in
cartilage metabolism.

Many studies suggest that chewing gum containing sugar alditols, such as
xylitol and sorbitol, can help control the development of dental caries.
Mothers who chew xylitol-sweetened gum may even block transmission of caries-
causing bacteria to their children. The benefit of these reduced sugars seems
to be based on stimulation of salivary flow, but an antimicrobial effect is
also possible. Xylitol also inhibits the expression and secretion of
proinflammatory cytokines from macrophages and inhibits the growth of
_Porphyromonas gingivalis,_ one of the suspected causes of periodontal
disease. Children who drank xylitol solutions also had a lower occurrence of
otitis media.

Human milk contains about 70 g/L of lactose and 5–10 g/L of free
oligosaccharides. More than 130 different glycan species have been identified
with lactose at the reducing end, including poly-[ _N_
-acetyllactosamine](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/nacetyllactosamine/) units.
Some glycans are α2-3- and/or α2-6-sialylated and/or fucosylated in α1-2,
α1-3, and/or α1-4 linkages. In contrast, bovine milk, the typical mainstay in
human infant formulas, contains much smaller amounts of these glycans. These
differences may account for some of the physiological advantages seen for
breast-fed versus formula-fed infants. The glycans may also favor growth of a
nonpathogenic bifidogenic microflora and/or block pathogen adhesion that
causes infections and diarrhea. Surprisingly, a substantial number of human
milk oligosaccharides remain almost undigested in the infant's intestine and
are excreted intact into the urine. Whether supplementing infant formula with
specific, biologically active free glycans enhances infant health is unknown.

[Polysaccharide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/polysaccharide/) vaccines
consisting solely of glycan components typically elicit poor immunity,
especially in infants. Because glycans are T-cell-independent antigens they do
not effectively stimulate T-helper-dependent activation and class switching of
B-cell-mediated immunity. Conjugate vaccines consisting of glycans coupled to
carrier proteins have proven to be highly effective. Three major conjugate
vaccines are marketed today: _Haemophilus influenzae_ type b (Hib) causes an
acute lower respiratory infection among young children. Children up to this
age constitute a high risk group for _H. influenzae_ type B infections.
Consequently, the Hib PSV introduced in 1985 was withdrawn from the market in
1988 and replaced by CPS-protein conjugate vaccine formulations. A conjugated
form of an Hib-derived oligosaccharide coupled to a protein carrier is part of
routine vaccination schedules and has been so successful that infectious
diseases caused by this bacterium are nearly eradicated in vaccinated
populations. A potent semisynthetic Hib glycoconjugate vaccine marketed in
Cuba contains glycan chains with an average length of 16 monosaccharides.
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines have been developed to cover an increasing
number of serotypes, and current formulations are 10- (Synflorix, GSK) and
13-valent (Prevnar13, Pfizer). Prevnar 13 provides protection against
serotypes that account for >70% of cases of invasive pneumococcal disease
worldwide and is the best-selling vaccine exceeding revenues of five billion
U.S. dollars in 2015. Conjugate vaccines to protect from _Neisseria
meningitidis_ are also very successful on the market. Due to the fast onset
and rapid progression of meningococcal infections, vaccination is required to
protect against this disease. Several conjugated CPS vaccines are licensed in
different parts of the world: the tetravalent serogroup A, C, W, and Y
(Menactra, Menveo, and Nimenrix) and a few monovalent vaccines based on
serogroup C CPS (Meningitec, Menjugate, NeisVac-C). Two combination vaccines
for _N. meningitidis_ and _H. influenzae_ type b (Hib) are available against
meningococcal serogroups C/Y (MenHibrix) and against meningococcal serogroup C
(Menitorix). A monovalent serogroup A vaccine (MenAfriVac) is widely used in
the sub-Saharan meningitis belt of Africa.

Currently, several new vaccines based on synthetic oligosaccharide antigens
are being developed to protect children and the elderly from a variety of
bacterial infections. Vaccines to protect from hospital acquired infections
that are increasingly antibiotic resistant are in preclinical evaluation.

Several carbohydrate-based cancer vaccines are at different stages of
development to treat cancer. [Ganglioside](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/ganglioside/) immunogens present on certain types of cancer cells, such
as gangliosides GM2 and GD2 in melanomas and globo H in breast cancer, are
being explored. The shorter glycan sequences such as sialyl-Tn
(sialylα2-6GalNAcα-) found on cancer mucins (see [Chapter
44](/books/n/glyco3/ch44/)) has seen little progress in twenty years. The
synthetic GloboH hexasaccharide (see [Figure
57.1](/books/NBK453070/figure/ch57.f1/?report=objectonly)) resembling the
breast and prostate cancer antigen has failed Phase 3 clinical trials in early
2017.

As discussed in [Chapter 34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/), many microbes and toxins
bind to mammalian tissues by recognizing specific glycan ligands. Thus, small
soluble glycans or glycan mimetics can be used to block the initial attachment
of microbes and toxins to cell surfaces (or block their release), and thus
prevent or suppress infection. Because many of these organisms naturally gain
access through the airways or gut, the glycan-based drugs can be delivered
directly without being distributed systemically. Milk oligosaccharides are
believed to be natural antagonists of intestinal infection in infants (see
above) and polymers that will block the binding of viruses such as influenza.
Although backed by a strong scientific rationale and robust in vitro studies,
such “antiadhesive” therapies have not yet found much practical application.

When specific glycan–protein interactions are responsible for selective
cell–cell interactions and a resulting pathology, then administration of
small-molecule glycomimetics of the natural ligand is a useful means of
intervention. [Selectin](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/selectin/)-mediated
recruitment of neutrophils and other leukocytes into sites of inflammation or
ischemia/reperfusion injury involves specific selectin–glycan interactions in
the vascular system (see [Chapter 31](/books/n/glyco3/ch31/)). The use of
sialyl Lewis x tetrasaccharide derivatives failed due to poor oral
availability and a short serum half-life.
[Glycomimetics](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/glycomimetics/) that preserve the
essential functionality of the parent tetrasaccharide but eliminate unwanted
polar functional groups and synthetically cumbersome glycan components have
been successful. The design of a monosaccharide glycomimetic starting from
sialyl Lewis x is shown in [Figure
51.3](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/figure/ch51.f3/?report=objectonly). First, the
sialic acid residue was replaced with a charged glycolic acid group, the _N_
-acetylglucosamine residue was then replaced with an ethylene glycol linker,
and finally the galactose residue was replaced with a linker moiety. The
resulting glycomimetic had E-selectin binding affinity comparable to sialyl
Lewis x.

As discussed in [Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/), a variety of glycans,
including the classical A and B blood group determinants, can act as barriers
to blood transfusion and transplantation of organs. Rejection of mismatched
blood or organs occurs because hosts have a high-titer of preexisting
antibodies against the glycan epitopes, presumably as a prior reaction to
related structures found on bacteria or other microbes. In the case of the
[ABO](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/abo/) blood groups, incompatibility is
routinely managed by blood and tissue typing and finding an appropriate donor
for the recipient. Bacterial enzymes can be used in vitro to remove the A and
B blood group determinants from A and B red cells, converting them into
“universal donor” O red cells.

A related problem is found in xenotransplantation (i.e., the transplantation
of organs between species) which is actively being pursued as a solution for
the shortage of human organs for patients. The animal donors of preference are
pigs, because many porcine organs resemble those of humans in size,
physiology, and structure. However, unlike humans and certain other primates,
pigs and most other mammals produce the terminal “α-Gal” epitope on
glycoproteins and glycolipids. Because humans have naturally occurring high-
titer antibodies in blood directed toward this epitope, this results in
hyperacute rejection of porcine organ transplants, via reaction of the
antibodies with endothelial cells of blood vessels. Attempts to prevent this
reaction include blood filtration over glycan affinity columns to remove
xenoreactive antibodies and blockade of the interaction by infusing soluble
competing oligosaccharides. Transgenic pigs lacking the reactive epitope have
also been produced, as have animals with an excess of complement-controlling
proteins on their cell surfaces. Pig organs also have high levels of the
nonhuman sialic acid (Neu5Gc), against which most humans have antibodies. Even
if this problem is solved, there are other glycan and protein structural
differences between humans and pigs that cause later stages of graft
rejection, thus necessitating immunosuppression.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Wu Di, Benjamin
Schulz, Jonathan Viola, and Paeton L. Wantuch.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.058

Glyconanomaterials are interesting biological probes, given the central role
of multivalency in glycobiology. Tunable chemical and physical properties such
as electronic, photonic, and magnetic properties render nanomaterials that are
built on different scaffolds interesting to probe cellular, tissue, and
organismal interactions. The attachment of glycans can change the properties
of nanomaterials by constructing glycan-containing hybrids with better
solubility, biocompatibility, and lower cytotoxicity. Nanomaterials containing
glycans have been used as imaging agents, as spectroscopic tools, and to
monitor cellular systems, as well as for vaccination and drug delivery.

Glycoproteins or glycolipids are natural glycoconjugates that take part in
cellular communication, inflammation, and immune responses using
carbohydrate–protein or carbohydrate–carbohydrate interactions. Certain glycan
patterns are characteristic markers of diseases such as cancer, asthma, and
diabetes. The search for molecular mechanisms requires tools that mimic the
presentation of glycans on the cell surface.

Glycans play a unique functional role in biology as individual
protein–carbohydrate interactions are often of low affinity and broad
specificity, but Nature enhances specificity by utilizing multivalent
interactions. The number of carbohydrate residues on a biomolecular construct
and the presentation including branching are major determinants of binding
avidity of ligands to cell-surface receptors. Because the transition from
monovalent to multivalent is associated with a larger variation in
affinity/avidity than for some other ligand–receptor interactions, a
“thresholding” effect, and in some cases cooperativity, can be exploited by
Nature.

To explore and exploit the role of glycans, glycans have to be displayed in a
scenario closer to that found on the cellular scale. “Nanotechnology” moves
from the angstrom to the nanometer range (from ∼10−10 to ∼10−7 m) to create,
manipulate, and characterize structures on those scales.

Larger glycoconjugates bearing multiple copies of carbohydrate on various
scaffolds such as glycodendrimers or glycopolymers have been generated and
studied to probe carbohydrate–protein interactions. These constructs were
expanded to encompass more diverse nanomaterials with inherent high
surface/volume ratios to allow for a greater contact surface area and improve
any multivalency effects. The integration of nanomaterials in the
glycosciences will enable biomedical applications such as drug delivery
systems, imaging agents, diagnostic platforms, or precise sensing tools that
operate through biological mimicry. Merging the glycosciences and
nanotechnology improves our understanding of glycobiology and gives rise to
novel glycodevices.

Glyconanomaterials take advantage of the unique physical properties of the
nanoscale such as catalytic, photonic, electronic, or magnetic properties that
are not seen in the bulk as well as from the properties of glycans such as
water solubility, biocompatibility, structural diversity, and targeting
properties. Metal, semiconductor, or carbon-based nanomaterials can confer
these unique properties to glycans, whereas glycans provide these
nanomaterials with an exceptional stability in water and biological buffers,
with biocompatibility, and with both passive and active targeting properties.

Additionally, nanoformulations based on polysaccharides have been developed as
drug delivery carriers. Superior to some synthetic materials in
biocompatibility, biodegradability, low toxicity, low cost, and the ease of
chemical modifications, polysaccharides such as chitosan, dextran, hyaluronic
acid, and heparin have enabled the preparation of polysaccharide-based
nanoparticles for pharmaceutical use. Moreover, in hybrid substructures,
polysaccharides were used to coat metallic nanoparticles to create
polysaccharide-coated nanoparticles.

Hybrid materials from inorganic nanostructures and biomolecules are a major
focus of nanotechnology. Iron oxide, noble metal, and semiconductor
nanoparticles served as synthetic scaffolds to multimerize glycans and enhance
the affinity for receptors ([Figure
58.1](/books/NBK453085/figure/ch58.f1/?report=objectonly)). The physical
properties, such as magnetism and fluorescence, of hybrid materials have given
rise to applications in sensing, delivery, or imaging.

The unique optoelectronic properties and facile chemical modification make
gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) an important tool to monitor biological binding
events. The conjugation of AuNPs with glycans endows them with high aqueous
solubility/dispersibility and biocompatibility as the basis for novel
strategies in bioanalytical applications. Color changes of AuNPs correlate
with the resonance between collective oscillations of electrons (plasmons) and
the incident electromagnetic radiation, giving rise to localized surface
plasmon resonance (LSPR). Resonance frequencies or surface plasmon bands of
gold lie in the visible region (400–750 nm) giving rise to color effects. The
high surface area/volume ratio of AuNPs allows particularly enhanced LSPR
sensitivity and colorimetric changes. Exploitation of 10–20-nm-sized modified
oligonucleotide-bearing AuNPs allows for the colorimetric detection of DNA.

AuNPs are produced by reducing gold salts with sodium citrate and surface
modification with “capping” agents. Size, shape, and morphology are tuned by
adjusting reaction conditions and allowing access to the near-infrared (NIR)
spectrum. Colorimetric carbohydrate–lectin analyses exploiting LSPR of AuNPs
have typically used 10-nm particles capped with thiol-poly(ethylene glycol)
(thiol-PEG) aldehydes decorated with lactose through reductive amination.
[_Ricinus
communis_](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?id=3988)
agglutinin (RCA120) induced a reversible color change as did cholera toxin.

Direct visualization is a particularly attractive method in biology. Stable
colloidal gold was first described by Faraday in 1857 but applied in biology
only in the 1970s when immunogold-staining procedures were used to observe
microorganisms by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Immunogold staining
with glyco-AuNPs used mannosylated particles to probe complement activation
and opsonization processes in macrophage-mediated endocytosis and to target
_Escherichia coli–_ containing type 1 pili mannose-specific receptors.
[Carbohydrate](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/carbohydrate/)–protein
interactions were visualized via TEM in which AuNPs were seen interacting at
the pili tips of _E. coli_.

Very small gold glyconanoparticles can be prepared by reducing a gold salt in
the presence of glycosylated thiol ligands ([Figure
58.2](/books/NBK453085/figure/ch58.f2/?report=objectonly)).
[Ligand](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/ligand/) density and composition can be
adjusted precisely. These glyconanoparticles conserve the chemical properties
of the ligands and can be advantageously characterized by ultraviolet-visible
(UV-Vis) spectroscopy, infrared (IR) spectroscopy, elemental analysis, nuclear
magnetic resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)), TEM, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS).

The smaller glyco-clusters lack a LSPR band but can be observed in TEM.
Visualization of AuNPs helped to unambiguously demonstrate some weak,
previously controversial, effects. Lex-decorated AuNPs provided direct visual
evidence for the existence of Ca-mediated sugar–sugar interactions and were
used to explore potential mechanisms of sugar-mediated self-assembly of sponge
cells.

Small gold glyconanoparticles were helpful in clarifying mechanistic aspects
of multivalent carbohydrate recognition and have been exploited as
antiadhesion agents to prevent melanoma metastasis, as vaccine candidates, and
in cellular and molecular imaging.

Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), including iron oxide and manganese oxide
nanoparticles (NPs), are of particular interest as contrast agents for
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI can generate internal tomographic tissue
images by using a radio frequency (RF)-induced electromagnetic field;
modulation of that field's signal by particles (so-called “contrast”), allows
their location to be detected. In clinical practice, small molecule gadolinium
complexes are most commonly used as MRI “contrast” agents. MNP-biomolecule
hybrids, because of their size and the effect, are, however, typically more
sensitive, and because of their potential for the loading of many ligand
copies, are expected to be better for receptor targeting and multimodal
imaging power (by attaching other labels that allow additional modes).

Functionalization of the MNP surface is the basis for molecule-specific
binding interactions and “molecular MRI.” Antibodies have been widely used
because of their superb specificity but suffer from high cost, short lifetime
due to thermal instability, and their potential immunogenicity. Structurally
defined ligands such as glycans in glyco-MNPs provide an attractive
alternative.

Glyco-MNPs allow for detection of early stage disease by successfully
mimicking leukocyte recruitment during inflammation (see [Figure
58.2](/books/NBK453085/figure/ch58.f2/?report=objectonly)). By taking
advantage of their high surface/volume ratio, glyco-MNPs can display multiple
copies of oligosaccharides, thus increasing potential multivalency of binding
interactions. Tetrasaccharide sialyl-Lewis x (sLex)-functionalized MNPs
successfully targeted E-/P-selectins. Notably, sLex-MNPs detected inflammation
events, both in vitro and in vivo without any significant signs of associated
cytotoxicity. Studies inside the brain of mouse models of stroke allowed
detection by specifically binding to the activated endothelium of blood
vessels running through diseased tissue ([Figure
58.3](/books/NBK453085/figure/ch58.f3/?report=objectonly)). Cross-species
efficacy is possible with sugars but harder to achieve with antibody ligands.
Thus, glyco-MNPs may be translated more readily from mammalian models to the
clinic.

Quantum dots (QDs) are luminescent semiconducting nanomaterials. Typically,
QDs are made of binary cadmium or zinc selenides or sulfides. QDs can emit
light in the entire spectrum and their optical properties are tunable
depending on the size. Compared with organic dyes, QDs also have a broader
excitation spectrum and sharper emission bands, allowing for multicomponent
analysis with a single excitation source. The first glyco-QDs functionalized
with carboxymethyldextran and polylysine were used to study
carbohydrate–protein interactions. QDs can be stabilized with glycodendrimers.
The addition of maltose-modified dendrimers rendered the QDs water soluble and
biocompatible while enhancing stability.

Using a host–guest strategy, β-cyclodextrin-quantum dots (β-CD-QDs) were
prepared. Synthetic β-CD-QDs behaved much like PEGylated QDs and agglutinated
lectins such as ConA, [_Galanthus
nivalis_](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?id=4670)
agglutinin (GNA), and peanut agglutinin (PNA).

Elemental carbon has several allotropes including tetravalent diamond and
trivalent graphitic structures, all of which provide potential scaffolds for
the arraying of glycans. One allotrope, buckminsterfullerene C60, is the basis
for discrete constructs that, although larger than many small molecules, can
be manipulated using techniques common to smaller molecules. For the resulting
graphene-like sheets, the ratio of boundary carbon atoms/inner carbon atoms
increases; and the global reactivity of these structures changes. Carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) can be considered to be cylindrical, elongated fullerenes. As
a consequence of their curvature, hybridization, and boundary/inner atom
ratios both fullerenes and CNTs possess reactivities that differ from those of
other carbon allotropes.

Glycosylated-fullerenes such as α-D-mannosyl [60]fullerenes and fullerenols
inhibit erythrocyte aggregation. These “sugar balls” are generated by the
introduction of a reactive group such as a terminal alkyne followed by
attachment of azido sugars. Thereby, a near-spherical display of glycans is
possible. The glycosylated C60s with 0.7-nm diameter are the smallest
“nanoparticles” for glyconanotechnology.

CNTs are classified based on the number of graphene-like sheets that make up
the sidewalls of the cylinder. Single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) have a typical
diameter of 1–2 nm and multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) have diameters of ∼2–25 nm.
The CNT length can range from tens of nanometers to tens of micrometers or
even longer. The inner hollow space and outer surface may be used together to
create functionalized CNTs (f-CNTs) to serve as delivery systems.

Broader use of CNTs has been hampered by their perceived cytotoxicity and poor
solubility. Cytotoxicity arises from very long needle-like CNTs similar to
asbestos that can be avoided by using the right constructs. Noncovalent
modification of CNTs relies on physical mixing such as sonication of CNTs with
surfactants or polymers. Because the conjugated pi-“scaffolding” of graphene-
like sheets is preserved in CNTs, unique physical properties, including
characteristic Raman resonances and photoluminescence, are often retained. To
mimic mucins, CNTs have been coated, for example, with glycopolymers. A
C18-lipid tail “wrapped” the CNT surface through hydrophobic interactions
while α-GalNAc residues were incorporated as the cell-surface carbohydrate.
Glycopolymer-coated CNTs were nontoxic in vitro, whereas noncoated CNTs
induced death in certain cells. The use of glycodendrimers allowed for more
uniform CNT coating. Noncovalent modifications have the risk of losing their
coating materials once introduced into a biological milieu and the ultimate
fate of such noncovalent f-CNTs following loss of surfactant molecules by
interaction with cell membranes can be unclear.

Covalent surface glycosylation or glycoconjugation of CNTs creates in vivo
biological probes. Covalent modification by oxidation of the CNT surface to
introduce carboxylic acids allows for attachment of amino sugars.
Galactosylated-SWCNTs created in this way can “capture” pathogenic _E. coli_.
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images show a strongly bound matrix formed
by cells binding to glycosylated nanotubes.

Direct attachment of β-GlcNAc residues via a “one-pot” Staudinger reduction
and amidation allows for good control of anomeric configuration.
Glycosyltransferases were used for regio- and stereoselective elaboration
following monosaccharide attachment. The sugar hydroxyl groups were used as
“tagging” sites to visualize the glycans via TEM of heavy element-bearing
labels.

Direct 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of reactive azomethine ylides that were
generated in situ from α-amino acids create pyrrolidine derivatives of
fullerenes and CNTs. This covalent approach avoids oxidative “cutting” and
provided filled-and-functionalized glycosylated CNTs for in vivo applications.

Such nanotubular structures can be considered “1D hollow pores” and display an
associated capillarity. In this way, molten salts or their solutions can be
encapsulated inside CNTs through capillary action. Filled glyco-CNTs were used
for encapsulation of the radioemitter Na125I and in vivo localization of high
levels of radionuclide. Multiple copies of GlcNAc improved both water
dispersibility and biocompatibility. Thanks to the high aspect ratio and
surface area to volume ratio of such CNTs, sugars can be efficiently displayed
in a multivalent format ([Figure
58.4](/books/NBK453085/figure/ch58.f4/?report=objectonly)). These “filled-
closed-functionalized” glyco-CNTs are alternative radiotracers for in vivo
imaging or radiation-delivery systems with high radioisotope-loading capacity
and high sensitivity. The rapid uptake of iodide by the mammalian thyroid
served as a test of any potential leakage of radioactive iodide “cargo.”
Although “free” iodide 125I rapidly entered the thyroid, iodide encapsulated
in the glyco-CNT remained at its target site even after a month.

A supramolecular carbohydrate-functionalized two-dimensional (2D) surface was
prepared by decorating thermally reduced graphene sheets with multivalent
sugar ligands. Host–guest inclusion on the carbon surface provides a versatile
strategy to increase the water solubility of graphene materials and present
biofunctional binding groups. The modification with multivalent sugar ligands
makes the carbon material an excellent platform for agglutinating and
inhibiting the motility of bacteria. Taking advantage of the responsive
property of supra­molecular interactions, the captured bacteria can then be
released partially by adding a competitive guest. The unique thermal IR-
absorption properties of graphene allow for the killing of the captured
bacteria by IR-laser irradiation of the captured graphene–sugar– _E. coli_
complex.

Natural polysaccharides are very useful for preparation of nanometric
carriers. The low toxicity, biocompatibility, stability, low cost, hydrophilic
nature, and availability of reactive sites for chemical modification render
polysaccharides attractive building blocks for pharmaceutical applications.
Polysaccharides can be used as NP backbone or coating.
[Polysaccharide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/polysaccharide/)-based
nanoparticles are prepared by covalent or ionic cross-linking, polyelectrolyte
complexation, or self-assembly of hydrophobically modified polysaccharides.
Polysaccharide coats improve the water solubility, stability, and long-term
circulation of polymeric or metallic nanoparticles.

Chitosan-based NPs were used as drug delivery systems. Positively charged
chitosan gives rise to ionic cross-linked particles with polyanions to deliver
proteins, oligonucleotides, and plasmid DNA. Multifunctional glycol-chitosan
NPs incorporating a NIR fluorophore for fluorescence imaging can encapsulate
anticancer drugs or complex small interfering (siRNA) for sequential drug
delivery. Chitosan-PEG-coated iron oxide NPs improve intracellular delivery of
a DNA repair inhibitor (O6-benzylguanine) to glioblastoma multiform cells and
enable treatment monitoring by MRI. Dextran improves the water solubility and
stability of iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles. Sulfated dextran
electrostatically interacts with positively charged polycations. By
functionalization of dextran-coated iron oxide NPs with sLex tetrasaccharide,
inflammation events in mouse brain can be monitored both in vitro and in vivo.
Hyaluronic acid and heparin-based NPs are promising platforms in cancer
therapy. Unlike chitosan- or dextran-based NPs they display inherent targeting
properties. Hyaluronic acid binds to CD44, a transmembrane glycoprotein that
is overexpressed in many types of cancer. This targeting property has promoted
the application of hyaluronic acid-based NPs as theranostic agents. Hyaluronic
acid-coated superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs have been used for imaging and
drug delivery to cancer cells.

Nanocarriers based on heparin and heparin derivatives have been applied to
combat cancer via targeted, magnetic, photodynamic, and gene therapy. Gold and
magnetic NPs have been coated or modified with heparin to improve the
biocompatibility for applications in heparin-mediated events.
[Polysaccharide](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/polysaccharide/)-functionalized
gold NPs have given rise to multifunctional NPs with a wide range of
applications including imaging, photodynamic therapy, and apoptosis induction
of metastatic cells.

Glycodendrimers allow for fine-tuned control over the number and orientation
of glycans on a nanosized molecule. Glycodendrimers with increasing numbers of
branching points and glycan content at the surface were used to study lectin-
binding properties. “Click” chemistry and amide bond formation have been used
to tether sugar molecules to the dendrimer scaffold. Mannose-conjugated
glycodendrimers bind specifically to ConA. Supramolecular assemblies have been
prepared to display carbohydrates in a defined manner. Dendrimeric arms have
also been affixed to β-cyclodextrin (βCD). The βCD was modified to incorporate
either a drug such as doxorubicin or a fluorescent dye to monitor the uptake
of the dendrimeric structure. Hepatocytes were found to preferentially take up
galactose-functionalized materials. Thereby, specific delivery of doxorubicin
to hepatocytes was achieved.

Three-dimensional supramolecular scaffolds expressing clusters of sugars were
based on Ru(bpy)3. βCDs decorated with seven mannose functional groups each
were bound to the ruthenium core via hydrophobic interactions with adamantyl
functional groups appended on the core. The resulting supramolecular
assemblies bind _E. coli_ that express the mannose receptor in the bacterial
pili.

Glycodendrimers can also be combined with particles to create multiple levels
of multivalency from both dendrimer and particle. In one example,
glycodendrimers displayed on protein-derived particles (virus-like particles)
allowed for picomolar inhibition of Ebola virus–related adhesion events.

Glycans are suitable biomarkers for medical diagnostics. Glyconanotechnology
aids the development of biosensors and methods for the detection of glycans,
lectins, or cancer cells and pathogens. Nanoengineered glycan sensors may help
with glycoprotein profiling without labeling or glycan liberation steps. A
variety of nanomaterials are being explored as specific probes for the label-
free lectin or glycan detection. AuNPs and CNTs are the most widely used
nanomaterials. Nanoengineered materials can be detected by mass changes with
quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) and cantilever sensors, by field-effect
transistor (FET) sensors based on carbon nanotubes, or optical sensors based
on surface plasmon resonance ([SPR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/surfaceplasmonresonancespr/)) in combination with self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs) of glycans or lectins.

Cancer cells and pathogen can be detected using glyconanomaterials. Gold
glyconanoparticles and silver signal amplification were used to detect and
quantify cell-surface mannose glycans. Gold nanoparticles were covered with
mannan and incubated with a human gastric cell line in the presence of the
mannose-binding lectin ConA. The specific detection of cancer cells requires
further refinement of the system such as the substitution of ConA by a panel
of lectins that recognize aberrant glycosylation specific to cancer. ConA-
functionalized CNTs were used for electrochemical surface glycan detection.
The label-free detection of cells binding to ConA was realized by
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Water decontamination was
achieved by precipitation of bacteria with glycan-functionalized nanodiamonds
as cross-linkers followed by filtration through a 10-mm membrane.

The translation of biomolecular binding events into nanomechanics using a
nanosized cantilever array of mannosides was applied to detect and
discriminate different strains of _E. coli_ bacteria. Methods exploiting
intrinsic optical properties can be explored for biomedical “nonlabeled”
imaging applications. QDs and AuNPs allow for spectral tuning, whereas SWCNTs
show characteristic Raman peaks as well as photoluminescence in the NIR range.
These intrinsic properties have yet to be systematically explored in vivo but
hold significant application potential.

Various glyconanomaterials have been prepared by covering different materials
with glycans. Potential applications of these materials range from pathogen
detection to diagnostic agents. Given the specific roles of natural,
endogenous cellular glycoconjugates, glyconanomaterials that display on
similar length scales provide chemical platforms to advance our understanding
of carbohydrate-mediated biological events.

By taking advantage of the physical properties and inducible sizes,
translation of fundamental studies to biomedical glyconanotechnology appears
to be imminent. Biomedical imaging, using multimodal imaging techniques, such
as PET/MRI or fluorescence/MRI, is an attractive vision for using glyco-NPs.

The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Donald Bernsteel,
Lingquan Deng, and Patience Sanderson.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.059

Plant glycans are used by humans for many purposes. Wood, which is composed
predominantly of lignified secondary walls, is used as an energy source, as a
building material, and for papermaking. Pectins isolated from the primary cell
walls of fruits and polysaccharides isolated from seeds are used as
thickeners, stabilizers, and gelling agents in many foods and beverages. Plant
cell walls are the major component of forage used as animal feed. These walls,
as dietary fiber, also contribute to human health. Recent concerns about
unstable and diminishing oil supplies have led to renewed interest in using
plant glycans as feedstocks for energy production, for the generation of
polymers with improved or new functionalities, and for the generation of high-
value chemical precursors. In this chapter, we briefly describe four broad
categories—bioenergy, fine chemicals and feedstocks, polymeric materials, and
nanomaterials—in which plant glycans have the potential to replace or to
provide alternatives to petroleum-based products.

Plant glycans are used by humans as an energy source, as a building material,
and for making numerous products including paper.
[Cellulose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/cellulose/) from diverse plant
sources is the primary component of many valuable materials, including
textiles and plastics. Pectins are used as thickeners, stabilizers, and
gelling agents in many foods and beverages. Plant cell walls are used as
animal feed and, as dietary fiber, also contribute to human health. The
potential adverse effects of burning fossil fuels on the Earths' climate have
led to worldwide efforts to develop plant-derived glycans as a renewable raw
material to displace or supplement fossil fuels for energy production, for the
generation of polymers with improved or new functionalities, and for the
generation of high-value chemical precursors.

The process of photosynthesis by terrestrial plants has been estimated to
assimilate at least 100 billion metric tons of CO2 annually. The chemical
energy generated in this manner is stored predominantly in the form of
carbohydrates. Some of these carbohydrates are used for plant growth and
development or are converted to polysaccharides (starch and fructans) that
provide a plant with a readily available form of stored energy. However, a
considerable portion of the carbohydrate formed via photosynthesis is used to
produce the polysaccharide-rich walls that surround plant cells ([Chapter
24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)). Thus, plant cell walls account for a substantial
amount of biological carbon sequestration and are a potentially sustainable
and economical source of nonpetroleum-based energy and high-value chemicals.

First-generation bioethanol produced by fermenting the starch present in corn
grains currently accounts for virtually all of the liquid transportation fuel
generated from plant materials in the United States. The starch is first
treated with enzymes that convert it to glucose. The glucose is then fermented
to ethanol and carbon dioxide by adding yeast. Yeast can convert 1 kg of
glucose to 0.33 gallons (1.25 L) of ethanol and an equivalent amount of carbon
dioxide. The United States and Brazil together account for as much as 90% of
world ethanol production. Approximately 13 billion gallons (49 billion liters)
of ethanol are produced from corn annually in the United States. Brazil
produces approximately 6 billion gallons (23 billion liters) of ethanol
annually by fermenting the sucrose extracted from sugarcane. Corn and cane
bioethanol is then blended with gasoline in varying amounts or used directly
as a transportation fuel.

Concerns about the negative impacts of the large-scale production of corn-
based ethanol on food production and the environment has led to renewed
interest in generating ethanol and other liquid transportation fuels from
sustainable plant lignocellulosic biomass. This biomass is comprised
predominantly of lignified secondary walls ([Chapter
24](/books/n/glyco3/ch24/)) that are composed of cellulose (40%–50% w/w),
hemicellulose (25%–30% w/w), and lignin (15%–25% w/w). Several different
plants, including poplar, switchgrass, miscanthus, eucalyptus, and sugarcane
are being considered for use as bioenergy crops.

The biomass from energy crops can be converted to liquid fuel by fermentation
or by gasification. In gasification, the biomass is combusted in a low-oxygen
environment to generate syngas (hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide)
and heat. The syngas can then be reacted to produce diverse chemicals
including alcohols and diesel. Most of the technical challenges to commercial
biomass gasification are understood. However, the process has not been widely
adopted because of the high capital costs involved.

The generation of liquid fuel from lignocellulose by fermentation currently
involves using a cocktail of enzymes to convert the biomass to sugar, which is
then fermented to give the desired product. This approach will likely be
superseded by the development of bioprocessing technologies in which the
microorganism that ferments the sugars also releases them from the biomass.
The fermentation approach is simple in concept but there are many technical
challenges that must be solved before it becomes commercially viable. One
major obstacle is that the cellulose and hemicellulose in lignocellulosic
biomass are not readily accessible to hydrolytic enzymes and thus are not
efficiently converted to fermentable sugars. The biomass must be pretreated
with dilute acid, ammonia, or steam to decrease this recalcitrance. Cost-
effective and environmentally sound pretreatment technologies need to be
developed if the commercial production of biofuels by fermentation is to
become a reality. The efficiency of the enzymes used to convert the cellulose
and hemicellulose to sugar must also be improved. To this end there is
extensive ongoing research to engineer thermophilic microorganisms to more
efficiently deconstruct biomass and to convert the released sugars to the
desired fuel, avoiding the necessity of releasing sugars from the biomass with
enzyme cocktails before fermentation. Increased understanding of cell wall
structure together with knowledge of polysaccharide and lignin biosynthesis is
expected to facilitate the engineering of plants to produce biomass that is
more amenable to bioprocessing. However, the susceptibility of such plants to
biotic and abiotic stress in the field will need to be addressed. Such
concerns, together with those regarding the introduction of genetically
modified plants into the environment, may be lessened by identifying natural
plant variants that produce lignocellulosic biomass that is less recalcitrant
to saccharification.

Lignin will be a major by-product of commercial biorefineries, as it is not
converted to a liquid fuel during fermentation. Early concepts of
biorefineries envisioned burning the lignin to generate power. However, there
is now a greater emphasis on using the recovered lignin to produce value-added
compounds for the chemical industry. Considerable resources are being
allocated to research and development worldwide to create a viable and
sustainable lignocellulosic advanced biofuels and bioproducts industry.
Nevertheless, many technical, environmental, and societal challenges must be
solved if this industry is to develop and contribute to a bio-based economy
and to reduce the demand for fossil fuels.

Several of the sugars released from lignocellulosic biomass, including glucose
and xylose, are being investigated for use in the production of functional
chemical precursors that are then used to make industrially relevant chemicals
and engineering polymers. Some examples of functional chemical precursors are
alcohols (ethanol, propanol, butanol, xylitol, and sorbitol), furans
(furfural, hydroxymethylfurfural), biohydrocarbons (isoprene and long-chain
hydrocarbons), and organic acids (lactic acid, succinic acid, and levulinic
acid). Current research is focused on optimizing the bioconversion of
polysaccharides (yield, rate, separation, titer, and product specificity) by
identifying and engineering improved fermentation organisms and fermentation
processes and developing improved chemical catalysts.

Plant-derived polysaccharides including cellulose, xyloglucan, and xylan have
been used to make a variety of polymeric materials used by industry.
[Cellulose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/cellulose/) has been extensively
modified to develop synthetic cellulose-based polymers. Cellulose films
(cellophane) and fibers (rayon) are produced using regenerated cellulose that
is itself formed by dissolving natural cellulose in alkali and carbon
disulfide and then precipitating the polymer in a process that has been used
for at least 125 years.

With society's ongoing need for polymers with new properties and functions,
there is increased effort to develop reaction pathways to modify the structure
of a polysaccharide backbone or side chains to enable the production of
polysaccharide derivatives with enhanced or new properties.
[Cellulose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/cellulose/) is one example of a plant
polysaccharide that has been extensively modified to develop new synthetic
cellulose-based polymers. Reaction pathways have been developed to generate
specific cellulose derivatives by substituting accessible hydroxyl groups with
other chemical groups. Such derivatives include cellulose acetate, cellulose
acetate propionate, cellulose acetate butyrates, carboxymethyl cellulose,
cellulose butyrate succinate, and cellulose acetate propionate. These products
are used in many industrial applications as coatings, inks, binders, and
thickening/gelling agents. They are also used in the pharmaceutical industries
to produce controlled-release drug tablets and in the cosmetics and food
industries as thickening and gelling agents.

With the complexity and variability of polysaccharide structures, there is
still considerable potential for the development of new synthetic
polysaccharides with new or enhanced functionality. To this end, current
research aims to further understand and use new reaction pathways that target
chemical modifications to specific locations on the polysaccharide and thereby
generate regioselective functionalization.

Linear polysaccharides that have little or no branching of their backbone can
self-assemble to form ordered structures in which the individual polymer
chains stack in parallel with each other along the chain axis, thus forming a
crystalline structure. [Cellulose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/cellulose/) is
one example of a plant polysaccharide that has this type of crystalline
structure. During cellulose biosynthesis individual glucan chains assemble to
form microfibril structures that contain both crystalline and disordered
arrangements (see [Figure
59.1A](/books/NBK453079/figure/ch59.f1/?report=objectonly)). The high
mechanical stiffness and tensile strengths along the length of the
microfibrils allows cellulose to provide high mechanical strength, high
strength-to-weight ratio, and toughness for plant tissues and organs.

The cellulose fibril structures and the crystalline regions can be isolated
using specialized chemical-mechanical extraction methods. The resulting
particles, which have dimensions on the nanoscale, are typically referred to
as cellulose nanomaterials (CNs; [Chapter 58](/books/n/glyco3/ch58/)). The
CNs' morphology, properties, and surface chemistry vary depending on the plant
source and the conditions used to extract the cellulose. Plant CNs are
typically classified as cellulose nanocrystals or cellulose nanofibrils.
[Cellulose](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/cellulose/) nanocrystals are rod-like
particles, which are between 3 and 20 nm wide and between 50 and 500 nm in
length ([Figure 59.1B](/books/NBK453079/figure/ch59.f1/?report=objectonly)).
Cellulose nanofibrils are fibril-like particles, which are between 5 and 100
nm wide and between 500 nm to several microns in length ([Figure
59.2](/books/NBK453079/figure/ch59.f2/?report=objectonly)). Both types of CNs
have high stiffness and tensile strength, low thermal expansion, and low
density and are thermally stable up to between 200°C and 300°C. The surfaces
of the CNs can be chemically functionalized and have the potential to be
processed at industrial scale at low cost. Preliminary studies suggest that
CNs have minimal environmental, health, and safety risks. Thus, CNs are being
used to develop new composites that take advantage of the CNs' enhanced
mechanical properties, higher surface-area-to-volume ratio, and engineered
surface chemistries. For example, CNs have been added to diverse natural and
synthetic plastics to enhance the mechanical, optical, thermal, and barrier
properties of the resulting composite. Cellulose nanocrystals have also been
used in various composite films, fibers, aerogels, and hydrogels, which have
potential applications that include barrier films, separation membranes,
antimicrobial films, and transparent films; flexible electronics, cements, and
biomedical applications; and fibers and textiles, as well as template
scaffolds for catalytic supports, batteries, supercapacitors, and body armor.

There are many technical challenges that must be overcome before CNs can be
used in commercial products. Research in CNs is accelerating and is covering
an ever-broadening scope of topics, including, but not limited to, improved CN
production technologies, CN suspensions, CN surface functionalization,
improved and new CN characterization techniques, CN composite processing, CN
composite properties, predictive modeling, life-cycle analysis, environmental
health and safety, and exploration into new applications of CNs.

Considerable resources are being allocated to research and development to
create economically viable and sustainable biofuels and bioproducts industries
that use plant glycans as feedstocks. In the future, there is likely to be a
greater emphasis on using both the glycan and the lignin components of plant
biomass to produce liquid transportation fuels and value-added chemicals. Such
developments will require the development of new chemical catalysts and robust
enzymes in addition to plants engineered to produce biomass with enhanced
processing characteristics. Many technical, economic, environmental, and
societal challenges must be met if these industries are to develop and
contribute to a bio-based economy and to reduce the demand for fossil fuels.

The authors acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Andrew Kononov,
Vivek Kumar, Anne Q. Phan, and Michael Vaill.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology
[Internet]. 3rd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2015-2017. doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.3e.060

This closing chapter discusses the future potential of glycosciences for
impacting basic and applied research, human health, material science, and
renewable energy. Technological advances predicted to occur in the coming
years are mentioned. Finally, a sampling of glycoscience-related questions
that remain to be addressed in the future are presented.

Every living cell in nature generates a complex and diverse array of glycans
that is critical for the evolution, development, functioning, and survival of
all natural biological systems ([Chapter 1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/)). A strong
basic knowledge base regarding the genomics, chemistry, biochemistry,
biosynthesis, and biological roles of these ubiquitous and diverse molecules
is now well established ([Chapters
2](/books/n/glyco3/ch2/)–[19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). The broad outlines of
their natural occurrence and evolution ([Chapters
20](/books/n/glyco3/ch20/)–[27](/books/n/glyco3/ch27/)) and their recognition
by glycan-binding proteins ([Chapters
28](/books/n/glyco3/ch28/)–[38](/books/n/glyco3/ch38/)) is becoming clear, as
is their important role in normal and abnormal physiology and disease
([Chapters 39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)–[47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). Facile
methods for their analysis, manipulation, and synthesis of glycans have also
been established ([Chapters
48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)–[56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)), and their
significance in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries,
nanotechnology, and bioenergy and materials science is obvious ([Chapters
57](/books/n/glyco3/ch57/)–[59](/books/n/glyco3/ch59/)). Given all these major
advances in basic and applied research on glycans, there is no reason why this
major class of biomolecules should continue to be the “dark matter of the
biological universe.” However, an entire generation of scientists has been
largely trained without much exposure to, or knowledge of, glycans. Thus, it
will still be a while before these molecules take their rightful place in the
mainstream of thinking in conventional molecular and cellular biology and
medicine. Continued advances in basic and applied research on glycans will
occur, but this needs to be coupled with the training of a new generation of
scientists, engineers, and physicians, for whom these molecules will be an
obvious aspect of their understanding of living systems, in health and
disease.

As emphasized in a recent report from the National Research Council of the
National Academy of Sciences, nearly every disease process that affects humans
and other animals involves glycans ([Chapters
39](/books/n/glyco3/ch39/)–[47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). In past decades, it
has been realized that most functions of complex glycans are required at the
multicellular (organismic) level. In contrast, cycling monosaccharides (e.g.,
O-GlcNAc in the nucleus and cytoplasm) serve regulatory functions at the
single cell level. The critical roles of complex glycans in the biology of
intact organisms has been dramatically illustrated by the contrast between the
viability of glycosyltransferase mutant cell lines in culture ([Chapter
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)) with the often lethal outcome caused by
inactivation of the same enzymes in living organisms ([Chapter
41](/books/n/glyco3/ch41/)). Transgenic mouse studies and the severe
phenotypes of human congenital diseases of glycosylation ([Chapter
45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)) have dramatically revealed the critical importance
of glycans in development, physiology, and disease.

Most major diseases also involve disordered inflammation and immunity, in
which the glycan-binding selectins, [Siglecs](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/siglecs/), galectins, and other glycan-binding proteins ([Chapters
34](/books/n/glyco3/ch34/)–[36](/books/n/glyco3/ch36/)) play critical roles.
Most pathogens, viruses, bacteria, and parasites gain entry to cells by
binding to glycans on the cell surface ([Chapters 42](/books/n/glyco3/ch42/)
and [43](/books/n/glyco3/ch43/)). In addition, many vaccines against
infectious agents are directed against microbial glycans. Proteoglycans play
critical roles in development, tissue morphogenesis, and cardiovascular
disease and in regulating the actions of cytokines and growth factors. The
glycosaminoglycan heparin is one of the oldest and most commonly used “drugs”
in the clinic. [Notch](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/notch/) signaling, which
plays a major role in controlling morphogenesis in development and cell fate
decisions, is controlled by glycans ([Chapter 13](/books/n/glyco3/ch13/)), and
glycans on the surface of tumor cells play critical roles in tumor progression
and metastasis ([Chapter 47](/books/n/glyco3/ch47/)). Many of the current
therapeutics in use or under development are glycoproteins, like monoclonal
antibodies, which often require particular N-glycans for functional efficacy.
Defects in the synthesis of glycan chains on dystroglycan underlie many types
of congenital muscular dystrophy ([Chapter 45](/books/n/glyco3/ch45/)).
Dysregulated [O-GlcNAcylation](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/oglcnacylation/)
contributes to the etiologies of diabetes, neurodegeneration, cardiovascular
disease, and cancer ([Chapter 19](/books/n/glyco3/ch19/)). Although the few
scientists and physicians well educated in glycobiology are acutely aware of
the importance of glycans in disease, most others have not yet learned much
about this major class of molecules. However, it is now clear that studies of
glycans will be essential for understanding the pathophysiology of most
diseases and the development of effective therapies. For the great potential
of glycobiology to be realized, efforts need to be directed toward education
of all graduate and postgraduate students, clinicians, and basic scientists
and to advancing technologies that will allow ease of experimentation.

Clearly, in the not too distant future, we will run out of fossil fuels, which
are not renewable resources. Plants are by far the most efficient source of
renewable energy because they efficiently use photosynthesis to trap the sun's
energy, mostly in the form of glycans. The challenge in using plants as a
source of fuel is the difficulty in degrading plant cell walls into smaller
glycans that can be converted into usable fuels at a low cost ([Chapter
59](/books/n/glyco3/ch59/)). In the future, glycoscience will play a critical
role in the evolution of our society from one based on burning fossil fuels to
one based on the use of sustainable energy, in part derived from rapidly
growing plants and algae.

Carbon sequestration by photosynthesis to produce glycans is the major process
preventing carbon dioxide from building up to levels that would cause severe
“greenhouse” warming of the planet, with unpredictable climate disruption as a
major consequence. Wood, which is mostly made up of complex glycans, is
already a major building material. Paper, textiles, cellophane, and rayon are
others examples of everyday materials made from glycans. As our supply of
petroleum runs out, glycans will increasingly be used to provide materials for
the manufacture of plastics and a myriad of polymers ([Chapter
59](/books/n/glyco3/ch59/)). Various forms of modified cellulose, for example,
will be critical for the manufacturing of exotic materials and as carbon
sources for various chemicals.

Advances in mass spectrometry instrumentation and methods in recent years have
been remarkable ([Chapters 50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/) and
[51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)). The ability to use mass spectrometry to map
glycan attachment sites, to profile glycan structural variations, and to
determine detailed fine structures of glycans has progressed rapidly because
of technological advances in instrumentation, including electron capture and
electron transfer dissociation fragmentation methods, and the development of
ion traps with very high mass accuracy and sensitivity. In the future, ion-
mobility separations in the gas phase will allow the identification of glycan
isomers that have identical molecular masses in mixtures. In addition, there
have been major advances in the chromatographic isolation and separation of
complex glycans. New ultra-high-pressure pumps and very small particulate
high-pressure liquid chromatography ([HPLC](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/highpressureliquidchromatographyhplc/)) resins that can withstand high
pressures will also greatly increase the resolving power of chromatography.
Advances in ion mobility and high-resolution mass spectrometric methods are,
for the first time, allowing us to begin to decode the information content of
glycosaminoglycans ([Chapter 17](/books/n/glyco3/ch17/)). The development of
induced hyperpolarization methods shows great promise in greatly increasing
the sensitivity of nuclear magnetic resonance ([NMR](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/nuclearmagneticresonancenmr/)) analyses of glycans ([Chapter
50](/books/n/glyco3/ch50/)), which has been a major limitation in the analyses
of biological samples. Bio-orthogonal labeling methods continue to be
developed that will allow the study of changes in glycans in living cells in
real time. Currently, for atomic structural analyses of glycoproteins,
including [X-ray crystallography](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/xraycrystallography/), it is usually necessary to remove glycans to allow
for crystallization. In the future, as electron imaging methods, such as cryo-
electron microscopy (cryo-EM), continue to reach higher resolution approaching
that achieved by crystallographic analyses, there is hope to be able to obtain
images of glycoconjugates at atomic resolution, without the need to remove the
glycans. As NMR becomes more sensitive and can handle larger molecules, one
will also be able to visualize glycoconjugates in physiologically relevant
solvents and at appropriate temperatures. These developments will allow a much
more accurate view of the 3D structures of glycoconjugates. Eventually, one
will need to define the population of molecular species (glycoforms of
glycoproteins and glycolipids) at an organismal and cellular level to fully
understand structure/function relationships of glycoconjugates in response to
extracellular stimuli. Existing technologies that show great promise include
top-down glycoproteomics and high-throughput, high-resolution imaging methods.
In theory, if these methods live up to their promise, one day it may be
possible to define the complete set of molecular species of glycoconjugates in
a population and thus elucidate how they collectively contribute to the many
individual functions of a gene product. However, all these methods still
result in loss of information about labile modifications of glycans and also
involve breaking apart the intact glycome into pieces before analysis.
Ultimately, one will need to understand the actual structure of the intact
glycome in situ, in living systems.

In parallel with advances in such sophisticated methods, it is also important
to “democratize” the practical approach to glycobiology by developing simple
methods that can be used by the average biologist working at the bench,
without sophisticated instrumentation. In this regard, one should be able to
take advantage of the fact that millions of years of pathogen and symbiont
interactions with hosts have already generated a large number of highly
specific glycan-binding proteins, which could be harnessed to interrogate
glycosylation at multiple levels of resolution.

Because of their stereochemistry and water solubility, organic synthesis of
glycans has proven to be one of the most challenging areas of synthetic
organic chemistry ([Chapter 53](/books/n/glyco3/ch53/)). The combined use of
purified glycosyltransferases, with chemically synthesized glycan precursors,
has proven to be invaluable in the stereoselective synthesis of complex
glycans ([Chapter 54](/books/n/glyco3/ch54/)). Automated synthesis of glycans
is rapidly becoming a reality, and even the synthesis of the most complex
glycans, such as glycosaminoglycans, is becoming possible. In the future, it
seems likely that the synthesis of glycans will become nearly as facile and
widely available as the synthesis of nucleic acids and proteins. It should be
possible for biologists to easily obtain glycoconjugates that have
homogeneously uniform glycans, to further explore the structural and
functional roles of the glycans. The availability of nearly all of the major
glycosyltransferases and glycosidases in recombinant form should also greatly
increase our ability to modify glycoconjugates for investigations of
structure/function relationships. In addition, glycoengineering of proteins
and lipids will make it possible to generate molecules with novel properties,
for a wide variety of applications.

The complete mapping of multiple genomes continues to have a huge impact on
the advancement of glycoscience. The identification, sequencing, and
classification of genes important to glycosciences have already allowed us to
understand the evolution and functions of genes that affect glycosylation
(“glycogenes”) at an unprecedented rate ([Chapters 8](/books/n/glyco3/ch8/)
and [52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)). The wealth of information in these databases
has only just begun to be mined. These studies will lead to the identification
of novel glycosylation enzymes and should shed light on how various species
have evolved to produce their glycoforms and glycotypes. Current projects to
make cDNAs, mRNA, and proteins for most of the common glycoenzymes available
to the wider research community will greatly facilitate the study of
glycoconjugates by all investigators. The combination of organic synthesis and
chemoenzymatic synthesis will allow the production of well-defined glycan
arrays that contain the various binding epitopes for glycan-binding proteins.
Recombinant glycosyltransferases will become common tools to generate specific
glycans on glycoproteins and living cells, and these enzymes will greatly
enhance the many studies that now rely on the use of lectins ([Chapter
48](/books/n/glyco3/ch48/)) whose specificity is often not well defined.
Finally, the rapidly expanding analytical toolkit will be instrumental to
decipher the regulatory mechanisms that mediate homeostasis of glycoconjugates
at a cellular level. As with analytical methods, it is also important to
“democratize” the approaches by developing simple methods for the average
biologist working at the bench.

In recent years, great advancements in the glycomic profiling of glycans from
cells, tissues, or organisms have occurred. [Matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-
item/matrixassistedlaserdesorptionionizationmaldi/) mass spectrometry
(MALDI-[MS](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/massspectrometryms/)) has allowed the
rapid profiling of the majority of N- and O-glycans in a sample ([Chapter
51](/books/n/glyco3/ch51/)). As matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight (MALDI-[TOF](/books/n/glyco3/bm1/def-item/timeofflighttof/))
instruments also gain the ability to perform tandem mass spectrometry,
confidence in the structure of profiled glycans will continue to improve.
However, detailed structural analysis of individual glycans still remains a
low-throughput method that requires considerable expertise and expensive
instrumentation. The development of glycan arrays presenting hundreds of
different glycans of defined structure is perhaps one of the most impactful
recent developments in glycobiology ([Chapter 56](/books/n/glyco3/ch56/)).
These arrays have allowed for rapid, high-throughput analysis of the binding
specificities of numerous biologically important glycan-binding proteins,
including lectins, antibodies, viruses, and bacteria. It has been estimated
that these arrays will need to contain between 10,000 and 20,000 different
glycans to cover most possible glycotopes (this very conservative estimate
does not take into account various common and labile modifications of
glycans). In addition, more specialized arrays will be required to study
glycan-binding proteins made by prokaryotes or to study proteins that bind to
glycosaminoglycans, for example. Fortunately, the ability to make such large
and diverse glycan arrays is on the horizon, and the remaining challenge will
be to better understand the parameters of the glycan arrays, besides the
glycans themselves, that influence binding, such as linkers, spacing, and
density of glycans on solid supports.

At the present time, the study of glycan structure/function relationships
requires highly specialized expertise in synthetic and analytical chemistry.
The inherent difficulty in studying glycans remains a major challenge
preventing glycobiology—the study of glycan function—from entering mainstream
conceptual frameworks of biology. In response to this challenge, strong
emphasis has recently been placed on the development of facile technologies
that will allow nonglycobiologists, without specialized analytical chemistry
skills, to study glycans in a meaningful way. In fact, the use of
glycosyltransferase and glycosidase probes to manipulate glycans is not any
more difficult than the use of restriction enzymes and endonucleases to
analyze DNA. The use of antibodies and lectins specific for glycans also
exemplifies methods that can be readily applied by biologists lacking
expensive analytical equipment or extensive glycobiology expertise ([Chapter
49](/books/n/glyco3/ch49/)). In fact, several kits for the study of glycans
have emerged, as companies recognize the future market potential of
glycobiology. In addition, companies are offering highly purified enzymes,
antibodies, and chemistries, making it much easier to study glycans. In
contrast, few glycans are available for experimental purposes and most enzymes
that act on glycans are not commercially available. Equally important, most
investigators are not trained to know what questions to ask regarding the
roles of glycans attached to their favorite glycoconjugate. In addition to new
and facile methods to study glycans, education of the next generation of cell
biologists and biochemists with respect to the importance of glycans will be
key to advancing glycoscience to the next level.

It is clear from the chapters in this book that glycans affect all aspects of
life on this planet. Yet, there is still a great deal to learn about the
functions of glycans in biology. Below is a sampling of some “big” questions
in glycobiology that remain to be answered in the future.

Glycans affect the stability and turnover of cell-surface resident molecules
and many can self-associate in the plane of the membrane. Do they play a role
in the organization and regional concentration of molecules at the cell
surface? How do the various glycoconjugates on cell surfaces collaborate among
themselves and with glycan-binding proteins to organize the glycocalyx of a
given cell or its extracellular matrix? After all, most living cells in a
multicellular organism exist within a glycan-enriched gel, not in the
artificially fluid medium of the tissue culture dish.

Complex glycans clearly regulate the function, stability, and residence time
of receptors at the cell surface, and the addition of O-GlcNAc to nuclear and
cytoplasmic proteins regulates many of the signaling pathways downstream from
these receptors. Yet, still very little is known about the mechanistic roles
of glycans in these pathways.

Glycoproteins typically contain an array of many glycans with different
structures at individual sites in the polypeptide. Evidence suggests that
these arrays of glycans are site-specific and cell type–specific, and not
random in distribution. How does site-specific diversity arise and how is it
controlled? Does each glycoform have different biological functions or
variable strengths, and/or does the site-specific diversity control molecular
interactions? Or is the complexity the natural outcome of evolutionary arms
races between hosts and their pathogens, which exploit glycans in various
ways?

Many investigators are trying to discover biomarkers to help diagnose disease,
such as cancer. It has been proposed that identification of specific
glycoforms of a glycoprotein might improve the specificity and sensitivity of
these biomarkers.

Unlike most other biomolecules, glycans have a substantial degree of mobility
in aqueous solution. This further increases the potential information content
of these molecules but also raises further challenges for their analysis and
biological exploration.

Data from glycan analysis, animal models, and correlations from the clinic
strongly indicate that cell-surface glycans are critical to tumor progression
and metastasis. Yet mechanistically, relatively little is known with respect
to the roles glycans play in these processes.

It is known that glycans are critical to infectious disease and are key
antigens in the generation of several vaccines. As conventional antibiotics
become less effective, how does one exploit glycans to fight infectious
disease?

Most current analytical methods for glycans result in a marked loss of labile
modifications, particularly ester groups of various kinds. Given their
location and potential biological importance, there is likely a large
unexplored area of glycobiology that can only be approached with new
techniques.

The discovery that the highly diverse sialic acids are just the proverbial tip
of the iceberg of the ancestral family of nonulosonic acids has raised many
new questions. It appears that investigators are just beginning to scratch the
surface of this enormous diversity, and its potential biological significance.

The potential information content of glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans is
enormous. Yet, investigators are only just beginning to be able to understand
how the arrangement of sulfate esters and uronic acids affects affinity and
protein-binding selectivity. Elucidating how such diversity is regulated
temporally and spatially is also a major challenge, going forward.

Current data indicate that O-GlcNAc serves as a nutrient sensor to regulate
signaling and transcription. Yet, mechanistically, almost nothing is known
with respect to how the cycling of this sugar on and off proteins regulates
these processes at the molecular level.

There are hundreds of known monosaccharides and many can be present in
different ring and/or modified forms. So far, it appears that natural systems
have only incorporated a fraction of this diversity. Is this because of rate
limits on genomic and enzymatic evolution in the opportunity to incorporate
new monosaccharides, or is this an ascertainment bias, owing to the fact that
only a small fraction of species on the planet has been sampled. Is it
possible that every possible monosaccharide has been used somewhere in nature?

Every day witnesses new glycan structures being identified, with previously
unknown and novel sugar linkages, along with unique and unanticipated
modifications, such as acetylation, methylation, phosphodiesters, and
sulfation. How many such glycan structures exist within a glycome and to what
glycoproteins or lipids are they attached, and where are they attached? Much
of our knowledge of the human glycome comes from studying serum glycoproteins
and several cell lines, but there is little information about the overall
complexity of the human glycome either at the glycan level or the glycoprotein
level.

It is clear that investigators are just beginning to scratch the surface of
the organismal diversity within the complex diverse microbiomes that occupy
various niches in nature. Each time a new species within a given microbiome is
sequenced, the genomes are found to predict hundreds of “carbohydrate-active”
enzymes. Understanding the mechanisms and functions of all these molecules is
a major challenge for the future, as is the deciphering of the structures of
the complex glycans they generate, bind, or degrade.

Of the hundreds of known monosaccharides in nature, less than a dozen are
found in vertebrates, and many more tend to be found in simpler, earlier
evolved systems. Is this an ascertainment bias, or does increasing biological
complexity place limits on the fraction of the genome that can be committed to
controlling glycosylation?

Current data indicate that glycans are the most rapidly diverging components
of life-forms, with distinct gains and losses that sometimes become (or stay)
polymorphic in various lineages and clades. It seems likely that this is a
consequence of the intimate involvement of glycans in the most rapidly
evolving aspects of biological systems (i.e., host–pathogen interactions,
immunity, and reproduction). Further studies are needed to ascertain if
glycans are indeed involved in the process of speciation.

Currently, searches of the main genome and protein databases used by
essentially all biologists yield almost no information on the glycosylation
state of glycoproteins. Indeed, there is as yet no central comprehensive
database of glycan structures that an investigator can mine to determine the
occurrence, provenance, or phylogeny of a specific glycan of interest. An
international effort led by nearly every major country involved in the
glycosciences has come together to agree on uniform standards for describing
glycans in computer databases, and to develop methods to curate and maintain
glycan structural data. Together with the expanding use of uniform symbol
nomenclature ([Chapter 1](/books/n/glyco3/ch1/)), this is the first step
toward integrating glycomic data into mainstream protein databases ([Chapter
52](/books/n/glyco3/ch52/)).

As with other fields like protein sciences, there will always be a small cadre
of investigators whose primary interest is in the structure, chemistry,
biochemistry, and biology of glycans. But a combination of advances in
methodology and education will eventually integrate glycosciences into the
general awareness of biologists who are currently not trained to understand
the significance of glycans. As our understanding of the functions of glycans
increases, biochemists and biologists will come to recognize that glycan
modifications are no less important than the amino acids that make up the
polypeptide backbone or the nucleotides and nucleotide derivatives that make
up DNA and RNA. In the long run, glycobiology will merge into a holistic
approach to biological systems. When that intellectual singularity is
eventually achieved, further editions of this book may no longer be necessary.

